\input texinfo.tex
@c %**start of header
@setfilename nausicaa-zlib.info
@settitle Zlib for Nausicaa
@c %**end of header

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@include version.texiinc

@macro gnu{}
@acronym{GNU}
@end macro

@macro gpl{}
@acronym{GPL}
@end macro

@macro fdl{}
@acronym{FDL}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Special notes.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro forunix{}
@strong{Unix:}
@end macro

@macro fixme{TEXT}
@strong{FIXME: \TEXT\}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme related macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rnrs{VERSION}
@acronym{R\VERSION\RS}
@end macro

@macro rsix{}
Revised^6 Report on the algorithmic language Scheme
@end macro

@macro repl{}
@acronym{REPL}
@end macro

@macro srfi{}
@acronym{SRFI}
@end macro

@c Separating the @srfi{} macro from the number with a '--' rather than
@c a '-'  makes the expansion look  ugly in menu entries  under the Info
@c reader.  IMHO  this should not happen,  but it does; so  we live with
@c this, because the main purpose of this document is to provide an Info
@c version.
@macro ansrfi{NUM}
@srfi{}-\NUM\
@end macro

@macro clos{}
@acronym{CLOS}
@end macro

@macro library{SPEC}
@code{(\SPEC\)}
@end macro

@macro ffi{}
@acronym{FFI}
@end macro

@macro class{NAME}
@code{<\NAME\>}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Miscellaneous acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro ansi{}
@acronym{ANSI}
@end macro

@macro api{}
@acronym{API}
@end macro

@c Remember that @url is already used by Texinfo.
@macro aurl{}
@acronym{URL}
@end macro

@macro ascii{}
@acronym{ASCII}
@end macro

@macro cpu{}
@acronym{CPU}
@end macro

@macro csv{}
@acronym{CSV}
@end macro

@macro ieee{}
@acronym{IEEE}
@end macro

@macro iso{}
@acronym{ISO}
@end macro

@macro posix{}
@acronym{POSIX}
@end macro

@macro rfc{}
@acronym{RFC}
@end macro

@macro utf{}
@acronym{UTF}
@end macro

@macro utc{}
@acronym{UTC}
@end macro

@macro tai{}
@acronym{TAI}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Software acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gmp{}
@acronym{GMP}
@end macro

@macro gcc{}
@acronym{GCC}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Network related acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro http{}
@acronym{HTTP}
@end macro

@macro ftp{}
@acronym{FTP}
@end macro

@macro ip{}
@acronym{IP}
@end macro

@macro tcp{}
@acronym{TCP}
@end macro

@macro udp{}
@acronym{UDP}
@end macro

@macro smtp{}
@acronym{SMTP}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro func{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro snull{}
@code{()}
@end macro

@macro true{}
@code{#t}
@end macro

@macro false{}
@code{#f}
@end macro

@macro keyword{NAME}
@code{#:\NAME\}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c C language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro cfunc{NAME}
@code{\NAME\()}
@end macro

@macro cnull{}
@code{NULL}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros for references to external documents.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro glibcref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,libc}
@end macro

@macro autoconfref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,autoconf}
@end macro

@macro rsixref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,r6rs}
@end macro

@macro rfiveref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,r5rs}
@end macro

@macro ikarusref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,ikarus}
@end macro

@macro nauref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,nausicaa}
@end macro

@macro bibref{TAG}
@code{[\TAG\]}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c RNRS document macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rsixlibrary{THING}
@code{(rnrs \THING\ (6))}
@end macro

@macro arbno{THING}
\THING\*
@end macro

@macro atleastone{THING}
\THING\+
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used in normal text.

@macro meta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro metai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro metaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro metaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used inside @example environment and @samp directives.

@macro cmeta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro cmetai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro cmetaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro cmetaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used inside argument lists.

@macro ameta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro ametai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro ametaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro ametaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro hyper{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro hyperi{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro hyperii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro hyperiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@macro hypern{THING}
<\THING\n>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro varo{THING}
@var{\THING\0}
@end macro

@macro vari{THING}
@var{\THING\1}
@end macro

@macro varii{THING}
@var{\THING\2}
@end macro

@macro variii{THING}
@var{\THING\3}
@end macro

@macro variv{THING}
@var{\THING\4}
@end macro

@macro varn{THING}
@var{\THING\n}
@end macro

@macro vark{THING}
@var{\THING\k}
@end macro

@macro varj{THING}
@var{\THING\j}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Values.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@set TITLE                      Zlib for Nausicaa

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the full
@c name of this package.
@set PACKAGE                    Nausicaa/Zlib

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the
@c nickname of the project: the name that is used to compose the
@c distribution tarball or the web address.
@set PACKAGE_NICKNAME           nausicaa-zlib

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR} whenever we need to include the list of
@c authors of this document.
@set AUTHOR                     Marco Maggi

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL} whenever we need to include the
@c email of the *single* author of this document.
@set AUTHOR_EMAIL               @email{marco.maggi-ipsu@@poste.it}

@c To be used as @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} whenever we need to include the
@c list of copyright years.
@set COPYRIGHT_YEARS            2008-2010

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Copyright notice.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
@noindent
This document describes version @version{} of @value{PACKAGE}, a library
for @rnrs{6} Scheme that exposes the Zlib programming interface.  It is
built upon the Nausicaa/Scheme package, making use of its
foreign--functions interface.  It supports Ikarus, Mosh and Ypsilon
Scheme.

The package is distributed under the terms of the @gnu{} General Public
License (@gpl{}); the project home page of Nausicaa is at:

@center @url{http://marcomaggi.github.com/nausicaa.html}

@noindent
development of Nausicaa takes place at:

@center @url{http://github.com/marcomaggi/nausicaa/tree/master}

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} by @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the @gnu{} Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front--Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``@gnu{} Free
Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Headers.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Revision @version{}
@author @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ifinfo
@dircategory Development
@direntry
* nausicaa-zlib: (nausicaa-zlib).       Zlib for @rnrs{6} Scheme.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ignore
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@end ignore

@c page
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

@insertcopying

@menu
* overview::                    Overview of the package.
* constants::                   Constant values.
* struct::                      Data structure accessors and mutators.
* error::                       Error messages.
* utility::                     Utility functions.
* basic::                       Basic functions.
* advanced::                    Advanced functions.
* file::                        File functions.

Appendices

* zlib::                        Zlib compression library.
* Package License::             GNU General Public License.
* Documentation License::       GNU Free Documentation License.
* references::                  Bibliography and references.

Indexes

* concept index::               An entry for each concept.
* function index::              An entry for each function.
* variable index::              An entry for each variable.
* type index::                  An entry for each type.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@c page
@node overview
@chapter Overview of the package


@value{PACKAGE} is a part of the Nausicaa distribution of libraries for
@rnrs{6} Scheme implementations, exposing the @api{} of the popular Zlib
compression library at the Scheme level.  It is built upon the
Nausicaa/Scheme package, making use of its foreign--functions interface.
It supports Ikarus, Mosh and Ypsilon Scheme.

The installed libraries are:

@table @library
@item foreign compression zlib shared-object
Exports the single binding @code{zlib-shared-object} which references
the Zlib shared library.

@item foreign compression zlib sizeof
Exports bindings to constant values and data structure accessors.

@item foreign compression zlib platform
Exports a binding for each foreign function; this library makes the
original Zlib documentation relevant for this package.  @ref{zlib, Zlib
compression library}.

@item foreign compression zlib primitives
Reexports bindings from @library{foreign compression zlib platform}
along with some functions implementing marshaling of arguments and
return values.

@item foreign compression zlib
Compound library reexporting bindings from the primitives and sizeof
libraries.
@end table

The Scheme documentation focuses on providing usage example to
familiarise with the mapping and with methods to handle resources.

@c page
@node constants
@chapter Constant values


The following bindings are exported by @library{foreign compression zlib
sizeof} and reexported by @library{foreign compression zlib}.  @ref{zlib
constants, Constants}.


@defvr Constant sizeof-z_stream
@defvrx Constant sizeof-gz_header
Size of the @samp{z_stream} and @samp{gz_header} data structures.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant Z_NO_COMPRESSION
@defvrx Constant Z_BEST_SPEED
@defvrx Constant Z_BEST_COMPRESSION
@defvrx Constant Z_DEFAULT_COMPRESSION
Select the compression level.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant Z_FILTERED
@defvrx Constant Z_HUFFMAN_ONLY
@defvrx Constant Z_RLE
@defvrx Constant Z_FIXED
@defvrx Constant Z_DEFAULT_STRATEGY
Select the compression algorithm.
@end defvr

@defvr Constant Z_NO_FLUSH
@defvrx Constant Z_PARTIAL_FLUSH
@defvrx Constant Z_SYNC_FLUSH
@defvrx Constant Z_FULL_FLUSH
@defvrx Constant Z_FINISH
@defvrx Constant Z_BLOCK
@defvrx Constant Z_TREES
Constants used to configure the operations of the library.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant Z_OK
@defvrx Constant Z_STREAM_END
@defvrx Constant Z_NEED_DICT
@defvrx Constant Z_ERRNO
@defvrx Constant Z_STREAM_ERROR
@defvrx Constant Z_DATA_ERROR
@defvrx Constant Z_MEM_ERROR
@defvrx Constant Z_BUF_ERROR
@defvrx Constant Z_VERSION_ERROR
Return values from the foreign functions.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant Z_BINARY
@defvrx Constant Z_TEXT
@defvrx Constant Z_ASCII
@defvrx Constant Z_UNKNOWN
Data type values.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant Z_DEFLATED
Algorithm selection for @func{deflate}.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant Z_NULL
Bound to zero.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant ZLIB_VERSION
The library version as a Scheme string string.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant ZLIB_VERNUM
The library version as a number; the version is encoded in hexadecimal
format.  For example @samp{#x1230} means version @code{1.2.3}, while
@samp{#x1240} means version @code{1.2.4}.
@end defvr


@c page
@node struct
@chapter Data structure accessors and mutators


The following bindings are exported by @library{foreign compression zlib
sizeof} and reexported by @library{foreign compression zlib}.  @ref{zlib
types, Data types}.


@deffn Syntax struct-z_stream-next_in-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-next_in-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-avail_in-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-avail_in-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-total_in-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-total_in-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-next_out-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-next_out-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-avail_out-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-avail_out-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-total_out-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-total_out-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-msg-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-msg-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-data_type-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-data_type-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-adler-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-adler-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-zalloc-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-zalloc-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-zfree-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-zfree-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-opaque-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-z_stream-opaque-ref @var{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for structures of type @samp{z_stream}.
@var{pointer} must be a pointer to such a data strcture.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-gz_header-text-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-text-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-time-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-time-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-xflags-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-xflags-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-os-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-os-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-extra-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-extra-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-extra_len-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-extra_len-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-extra_max-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-extra_max-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-name-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-name-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-name_max-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-name_max-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-comment-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-comment-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-comm_max-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-comm_max-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-hcrc-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-hcrc-ref @var{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-done-set! @var{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-gz_header-done-ref @var{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for structures of type @samp{gz_header}.
@var{pointer} must be a pointer to such a data strcture.
@end deffn

@c page
@node error
@chapter Error messages


The following bindings are exported by @library{foreign compression zlib
primitives} and reexported by @library{foreign compression zlib}.


@defun zError* @var{error-code}
@defunx zError @var{error-code}
These functions accept as argument one of the error code constants
defined by Zlib (@samp{Z_OK}, @samp{Z_BUF_ERROR}, @dots{}) and return a
string describing the error.

@func{zError*} returns a Scheme string.  @func{zError} returns a pointer
value referencing a statically allocated, @ascii{} coded, zero
terminated C string.
@end defun

@c page
@node utility
@chapter Utility functions


The utility functions @func{compress}, @func{compress2} and
@func{uncompress} are the simplest and less configurable interface to
the compression features of Zlib; they can compress and uncompress a
block of data in memory.  @ref{zlib utility, Utility functions}.

Let's start a program with:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (foreign compression zlib)
  (only (compensations)
        with-compensations)
  (only (foreign ffi peekers-and-pokers)
        pointer-ref-c-unsigned-long
        pointer-set-c-unsigned-long!)
  (only (foreign ffi sizeof)
        sizeof-long)
  (only (foreign memory)
        malloc-block/c)
  (only (foreign cstrings)
        string->cstring/c))
@end example

@noindent
we will make use of the @library{compensations} library, from
Nausicaa/Scheme, to handle memory allocation.  @nauref{compensations,
Compensation stacks}.

Let's say we want to compress a Scheme string:

@example
(define original "Is this the real life?
                  Is this just fantasy?
                  Caught in a landslide,
                  No escape from reality.
                  ...")
@end example

@noindent
first we convert it to a C string, then we can use @func{compress}:

@example
(with-compensations
  (let* ((input.len     (string-length original))
         (input.ptr     (string->cstring/c original))
         (output.len    (compressBound input.len))
         (output.ptr    (malloc-block/c input.len))
         (output.len*   (malloc-block/c sizeof-long)))

    (pointer-set-c-unsigned-long! output.len* 0 output.len)
    (assert (= Z_OK (compress output.ptr output.len*
                              input.ptr  input.len)))
    (set! output.len (pointer-ref-c-unsigned-long output.len* 0))

    ;; the compressed data is in the block bound to "output.ptr"
    ;; the number of bytes is in bound to "output.len"
    ))
@end example

@noindent
in this simplified example we have assumed that compressing succeeds, so
that the return value of @func{compress} is @samp{Z_OK}.

We can abstract the handling of the output size argument in the
following macro:

@example
(define-syntax with-pointer-to-length/c
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ (?ptr ?var) ?form0 ?form ...)
     (let ((?ptr (malloc-block/c sizeof-long)))
       (pointer-set-c-unsigned-long! ?ptr 0 ?var)
       (begin ?form0 ?form ...)
       (set! ?var (pointer-ref-c-unsigned-long ?ptr 0))))))
@end example

@noindent
with which the code becomes:

@example
(with-compensations
  (let* ((input.len     (string-length original))
         (input.ptr     (string->cstring/c original))
         (output.len    (compressBound input.len))
         (output.ptr    (malloc-block/c input.len)))

    (with-pointer-to-length/c (output.len* output.len)
      (assert (= Z_OK (compress output.ptr output.len*
                                input.ptr  input.len))))
    ---))
@end example

To decompress a block of memory, we use a similar chunk of code; let's
assume that we have previously saved the size of the original data, so
that we can allocate an output buffer of correct size:

@example
(with-compensations
  (let* ((input.len     ---)
         (input.ptr     ---)
         (output.len    saved-original-data-size)
         (output.ptr    (malloc-block/c input.len)))

    (with-pointer-to-length/c (output.len* output.len)
      (assert (= Z_OK (uncompress output.ptr output.len*
                                  input.ptr  input.len))))

    ;; the decompressed data is in the block bound to "output.ptr"
    ;; the number of bytes is in bound to "output.len"
    ))
@end example

@noindent
again we have assumed that compressing succeeds, so that the return
value of @func{uncompress} is @samp{Z_OK}.

@c page
@node basic
@chapter Basic functions


The basic functions allow us to compress and decompress data one block
at a time.  @ref{zlib basic, Basic functions}.

Let's start a program with:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (foreign compression zlib)
  (only (compensations)
        with-compensations)
  (only (foreign memory)
        malloc-block/c))
@end example

@noindent
we will use the @library{compensations} library from Nausicaa/Scheme to
handle memory allocation.  @nauref{compensations, Compensation stacks}.

To compress a block of data we do:

@example
(with-compensations
  (let* ((input.len   ---)
         (input.ptr   ---)
         (output.len  (compressBound input.len))
         (output.ptr  (malloc-block/c output.len))
         (zstream     (malloc-block/c sizeof-zstream)))

    (struct-z_stream-next_in-set!   zstream input.ptr)
    (struct-z_stream-avail_in-set!  zstream input.len)

    (struct-z_stream-next_out-set!  zstream output.ptr)
    (struct-z_stream-avail_out-set! zstream output.len)

    (struct-z_stream-zalloc-set! zstream pointer-null)
    (struct-z_stream-zfree-set!  zstream pointer-null)
    (struct-z_stream-opaque-set! zstream pointer-null)

    (deflateInit zstream Z_BEST_COMPRESSION)
    (deflate zstream Z_FINISH)
    (deflateEnd zstream)

    (let ((compressed.len (struct-z_stream-total_out-ref zstream)))
      ;; The compressed data is bound to "output.ptr".
      ;; The size of the compressed data is bound to
      ;; "compressed.len".
      ---)))
@end example

@noindent
we assumed that @func{deflate} can do its job in one call, which means
the output buffer is big enough to hold the compressed data; in the
general case we have to check its return value and manage the input and
output buffers accordingly.

To decompress data, let's assume we have saved the size of the original
block:

@example
(with-compensations
  (let* ((input.len   compressed.len)
         (input.ptr   compressed.ptr)
         (output.len  saved-original-data-size)
         (output.ptr  (malloc-block/c output.len))
         (zstream     (malloc-block/c sizeof-zstream)))

    (struct-z_stream-next_in-set!   zstream input.ptr)
    (struct-z_stream-avail_in-set!  zstream input.len)

    (struct-z_stream-next_out-set!  zstream output.ptr)
    (struct-z_stream-avail_out-set! zstream output.len)

    (struct-z_stream-zalloc-set! zstream pointer-null)
    (struct-z_stream-zfree-set!  zstream pointer-null)
    (struct-z_stream-opaque-set! zstream pointer-null)

    (inflateInit zstream)
    (inflate zstream Z_FINISH)
    (inflateEnd zstream)

    (let ((decompressed.len (struct-z_stream-total_out-ref zstream)))
      ;; The compressed data is bound to "output.ptr".
      ;; The size of the compressed data is bound to
      ;; "decompressed.len".
      ---)))
@end example

@noindent
we assumed that @func{inflate} can do its job in one call, which means
the output buffer is big enough to hold the compressed data; in the
general case we have to check its return value and manage the input and
output buffers accordingly.

@c page
@node advanced
@chapter Advanced functions


The advanced functions allow us to compress and decompress data one
block at a time, using customised compression options.  @ref{zlib
advanced, Advanced functions}.

Let's start a program with:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (foreign compression zlib)
  (only (compensations)
        with-compensations)
  (only (foreign memory)
        malloc-block/c))
@end example

@noindent
we will use the @library{compensations} library from Nausicaa/Scheme to
handle memory allocation.  @nauref{compensations, Compensation stacks}.

To compress a block of data we do:

@example
(define dictionary.len ---)
(define dictionary.ptr ---)

(with-compensations
  (let* ((input.len     original.len)
         (input.ptr     original.ptr)
         (output.len    (compressBound input.len))
         (output.ptr    (malloc-block/c output.len))
         (zstream       (malloc-block/c sizeof-zstream)))

    (struct-z_stream-next_in-set!   zstream input.ptr)
    (struct-z_stream-avail_in-set!  zstream input.len)

    (struct-z_stream-next_out-set!  zstream output.ptr)
    (struct-z_stream-avail_out-set! zstream output.len)

    (struct-z_stream-zalloc-set! zstream pointer-null)
    (struct-z_stream-zfree-set!  zstream pointer-null)
    (struct-z_stream-opaque-set! zstream pointer-null)

    (deflateInit2 zstream Z_BEST_COMPRESSION
      Z_DEFLATED          ; method
      10                  ; windowBits
      3                   ; memLevel
      Z_DEFAULT_STRATEGY) ; strategy

    (deflateSetDictionary zstream dictionary.ptr dictionary.len)
    (deflate zstream Z_FINISH)
    (deflateEnd zstream)

    (let ((compressed.len (struct-z_stream-total_out-ref zstream)))
      ;; The compressed data is bound to "output.ptr".
      ;; The size of the compressed data is bound to
      ;; "compressed.len".
      ---)))
@end example

@noindent
we assumed that @func{deflate} can do its job in one call, which means
the output buffer is big enough to hold the compressed data; in the
general case we have to check its return value and manage the input and
output buffers accordingly.

To decompress data, let's assume we have saved the size of the original
block and the dictionary:

@example
(define dictionary.len ---)
(define dictionary.ptr ---)

(with-compensations
  (let* ((input.len     compressed.len)
         (input.ptr     compressed.ptr)
         (output.len    saved-original-data-size)
         (output.ptr    (malloc-block/c output.len))
         (zstream       (malloc-block/c sizeof-zstream)))

    (struct-z_stream-next_in-set!   zstream input.ptr)
    (struct-z_stream-avail_in-set!  zstream input.len)

    (struct-z_stream-next_out-set!  zstream output.ptr)
    (struct-z_stream-avail_out-set! zstream output.len)

    (inflateInit2 zstream 10)
    (assert (= Z_NEED_DICT (inflate zstream Z_FINISH)))
    (inflateSetDictionary zstream dictionary.ptr dictionary.len)
    (inflate zstream Z_FINISH)
    (inflateEnd zstream)

    (let ((decompressed.len (struct-z_stream-total_out-ref zstream)))
      ;; The compressed data is bound to "output.ptr".
      ;; The size of the compressed data is bound to
      ;; "decompressed.len".
      ---)))
@end example

@noindent
we assumed that @func{inflate} can do its job in one call, which means
the output buffer is big enough to hold the compressed data; in the
general case we have to check its return value and manage the input and
output buffers accordingly.

@c page
@node file
@chapter File functions


The file functions allow us to read and write files compressed with the
Gzip format.  The following bindings are exported by @library{foreign
compression zlib primitives} and reexported by @library{foreign
compression zlib}.  @ref{zlib file, File functions}.

For the low level @api{} see the original documentation of Zlib, but
notice that:

@itemize
@item
@func{gzopen} returns two values: the first is the return value of the
foreign function, the second is the value of @samp{errno} right after
the foreign call.

@item
@func{gzopen} does not open the file immediately, it just registers data
needed to do it in the file handler structure.  It will be the first
read/write operation to open the file and signal an error.
@end itemize


@defun gzopen* @var{pathname} @var{mode}
Open a file in Gzip format.  Return two values: the first is a pointer
to the file handler; the second is the value of @samp{errno} right after
the foreign call.

@var{pathname} must be a Scheme string representing the pathname of the
file.  @var{mode} must be a Scheme string representing the open mode as
described in the original documentation of @cfunc{gzopen}

To open a file we should do:

@example
(let-values (((handler errno)) (gzopen* "blue.gz" "wb9"))
  (let-values (((code message) (gzerror* handler)))
    (cond ((= code Z_ERRNO)
           (write (strerror errno))
           (newline))
          ((= code Z_OK)
           #t)
          (else
           (write message)
           (newline))))
  ---)
@end example
@end defun


@defun gzdopen* @var{fd} @var{mode}
Wrap a platform file descriptor with a Zlib stream for reading or
writing compressed data.  Return two values: the first is a pointer to
the file handler; the second is the value of @samp{errno} right after
the foreign call.

@var{fd} must be an unsigned integer representing the file descriptor.
@var{mode} must be a Scheme string representing the open mode as
described in the original documentation of @cfunc{gzopen}
@end defun


@defun gzputs* @var{handler} @var{string}
Write a string in a compressed file.  @var{handler} must be the pointer
to a file handler structure.  @var{string} must be the Scheme string to
write.  Return the same return value of the foreign @cfunc{gzputs} call.
@end defun


@defun gzerror* @var{handler}
Return two values: the first is a Zlib error code representing the last
error for the file @var{handler}, the second is a Scheme string
describind the error.
@end defun

@c page

@include zlib-1.2.3.texiinc
@include gpl-3.0.texiinc
@include fdl-1.3.texiinc

@c page
@node references
@appendix Bibliography and references



@c page
@node concept index
@appendix An entry for each concept

@printindex cp

@node function index
@appendix An entry for each function.

@printindex fn

@node variable index
@appendix An entry for each variable.

@printindex vr

@node type index
@appendix An entry for each type.

@printindex tp

@contents
@bye

@c end of file
