\input texinfo.tex
@c %**start of header
@setfilename scheme.info
@settitle Scheme language for Nausicaa
@c %**end of header

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@include version.texiinc

@macro gnu{}
@acronym{GNU}
@end macro

@macro gpl{}
@acronym{GPL}
@end macro

@macro fdl{}
@acronym{FDL}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Special notes.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro forunix{}
@strong{Unix:}
@end macro

@macro fixme{TEXT}
@strong{FIXME: \TEXT\}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme related macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rnrs{VERSION}
@acronym{R\VERSION\RS}
@end macro

@macro rsix{}
Revised^6 Report on the algorithmic language Scheme
@end macro

@macro repl{}
@acronym{REPL}
@end macro

@macro srfi{}
@acronym{SRFI}
@end macro

@c Separating the @srfi{} macro from the number with a '--' rather than
@c a '-'  makes the expansion look  ugly in menu entries  under the Info
@c reader.  IMHO  this should not happen,  but it does; so  we live with
@c this, because the main purpose of this document is to provide an Info
@c version.
@macro ansrfi{NUM}
@srfi{}-\NUM\
@end macro

@macro clos{}
@acronym{CLOS}
@end macro

@macro library{SPEC}
@code{(\SPEC\)}
@end macro

@macro ffi{}
@acronym{FFI}
@end macro

@macro class{NAME}
@code{<\NAME\>}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Miscellaneous acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro ansi{}
@acronym{ANSI}
@end macro

@macro api{}
@acronym{API}
@end macro

@c Remember that @url is already used by Texinfo.
@macro aurl{}
@acronym{URL}
@end macro

@macro ascii{}
@acronym{ASCII}
@end macro

@macro cpu{}
@acronym{CPU}
@end macro

@macro csv{}
@acronym{CSV}
@end macro

@macro ieee{}
@acronym{IEEE}
@end macro

@macro iso{}
@acronym{ISO}
@end macro

@macro posix{}
@acronym{POSIX}
@end macro

@macro rfc{}
@acronym{RFC}
@end macro

@macro utf{}
@acronym{UTF}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Software acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gmp{}
@acronym{GMP}
@end macro

@macro gcc{}
@acronym{GCC}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Network related acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro http{}
@acronym{HTTP}
@end macro

@macro ftp{}
@acronym{FTP}
@end macro

@macro ip{}
@acronym{IP}
@end macro

@macro tcp{}
@acronym{TCP}
@end macro

@macro udp{}
@acronym{UDP}
@end macro

@macro smtp{}
@acronym{SMTP}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro func{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro snull{}
@code{()}
@end macro

@macro true{}
@code{#t}
@end macro

@macro false{}
@code{#f}
@end macro

@macro keyword{NAME}
@code{#:\NAME\}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c C language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro cfunc{NAME}
@code{\NAME\()}
@end macro

@macro cnull{}
@code{NULL}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros for references to external documents.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro glibcref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,libc}
@end macro

@c @macro rsixref{NODE, TITLE}
@c @ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,r6rs}
@c @end macro

@macro bibref{TAG}
@code{[\TAG\]}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c RNRS document macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rsixlibrary{THING}
@code{(rnrs \THING\ (6))}
@end macro

@macro arbno{THING}
\THING\*
@end macro

@macro atleastone{THING}
\THING\+
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used in normal text.

@macro meta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro metai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro metaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro metaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used inside @example environment and @samp directives.

@macro cmeta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro cmetai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro cmetaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro cmetaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used inside argument lists.

@macro ameta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro ametai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro ametaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro ametaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro hyper{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro hyperi{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro hyperii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro hyperiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@macro hypern{THING}
<\THING\n>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro varo{THING}
@var{\THING\0}
@end macro

@macro vari{THING}
@var{\THING\1}
@end macro

@macro varii{THING}
@var{\THING\2}
@end macro

@macro variii{THING}
@var{\THING\3}
@end macro

@macro variv{THING}
@var{\THING\4}
@end macro

@macro varn{THING}
@var{\THING\n}
@end macro

@macro vark{THING}
@var{\THING\k}
@end macro

@macro varj{THING}
@var{\THING\j}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Values.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@set TITLE                      Scheme language for Nausicaa

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the full
@c name of this package.
@set PACKAGE                    Nausicaa/Scheme

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE_NICKNAME} whenever we need to include
@c the nickname of the project: the name that is used to compose the
@c distribution tarball or the web address.
@set PACKAGE_NICKNAME           nausicaa

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR} whenever we need to include the list of
@c authors of this document.
@set AUTHOR                     Marco Maggi

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL} whenever we need to include the
@c email of the *single* author of this document.
@set AUTHOR_EMAIL               @email{marcomaggi@@gna.org}

@c To be used as @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} whenever we need to include the
@c list of copyright years.
@set COPYRIGHT_YEARS            2008, 2009


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Copyright notice.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
@noindent
This document describes version @version{} of @value{PACKAGE}, a set of
Scheme libraries defining a slightly modified @rnrs{6} Scheme language
and augmenting the features of the base and standard @rnrs{6} libraries.

The project home page of Nausicaa is at:

@center @url{http://marcomaggi.github.com/nausicaa.html}

@noindent
development of Nausicaa takes place at:

@center @url{http://github.com/marcomaggi/nausicaa/tree/master}

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} by @value{AUTHOR}.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 1996, 1997, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005
Free Software Foundation.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 1996, 1999-2005 Dorai Sitaram.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 1998 Oleg Kiselyov.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 1998, 1999, 2000 Olin Shivers.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 1999 John David Stone.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 1999, 2002 Marc Feeley.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2001, 2009 Danny Dube'@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Dr. Mirko Luedde.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2002, 2003, 2005, 2006 Sebastian Egner.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2003 Ray Dillinger.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2003 Taylor Campbell.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2005 Jens Axel Soegaard.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2005-2009 Alex Shinn.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Taro Minowa (Higepon).@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2005-2008 Dominique Boucher.@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2004, 2005 Tony Garnock-Jones @email{tonyg@@kcbbs.gen.nz}@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2005 LShift Ltd. @email{query@@lshift.net}

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the @gnu{} Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections being ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License'' and
``@gnu{} General Public License'', no Front--Cover Texts, and no
Back--Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation

This document embeds an unofficial assemblage of several documents
reformatted in Texinfo; the reformatting author and maintainer is
@value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}.  See the appendix ``Credits'' for
the list of original documents and their authors.  See also the
@file{README} and @file{CREDITS} files for additional attributions.
@end copying

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Headers.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Version @version{}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ifinfo
@dircategory Development
@direntry
* scheme: (scheme).             @value{TITLE}.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ignore
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@end ignore

@c page
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

@insertcopying

@menu
* overview::                    Overview of the distribution.
* lang::                        The Scheme language.
* baselib::                     Base library.
* stdlib::                      Standard libraries.
* naulib::                      The @library{nausicaa} language.

More libraries

* conditions::                  Predefined condition types.
* lists::                       Lists library.
* char-sets::                   Character sets library.
* strings::                     Strings library.
* vectors::                     Vectors library.
* arrays::                      Multidimensional arrays.
* comparisons::                 Comparison functions.
* loops::                       Loop constructs.
* random::                      Sources of random bits.
* format::                      Formatting strings.
* checks::                      Lightweight testing.
* debugging::                   Debugging utilities.
* queues::                      Simple queue.
* object-properties::           Object properties.
* cleanup-handlers::            Cleaning up.
* combinators::                 Combinators.
* compensations::               Compensation stacks.
* deferred exceptions::         Deferred exceptions.
* keywords::                    Keyword values.
* sentinel::                    The sentinel value.
* variables::                   Defining storage locations.
* records::                     Record utilities.
* scmobj::                      A simple object system.
* nos::                         Nausicaa Object System.
* sexps::                       Handling symbolic expressions.
* matches::                     Pattern matching.
* irregex::                     IrRegular expressions.
* pregexp::                     Portable regular expressions for Scheme.
* parser-tools::                Lexer and parser utilities.
* silex::                       A lexical analyser generator.
* lalr::                        A LALR(1) parser generator.
* packrat::                     Packrat parser.
* csv::                         Comma--separated value (@acronym{CSV}) utilities.
* schelog::                     Programming in Schelog.
* email::                       Email processing.
* infix::                       Infix notation utilities.
* foreign::                     Foreign functions interface.

Low level libraries

* kmp::                         Knuth--Morris--Pratt searching.
* one-dimension::               One dimensional extended ranges.

Appendices

* notes::                       Miscellaneous notes on everything.
* binfmt::                      Launching programs directly.
* examples::                    Scheme programming examples.
* credits::                     Credits.
* Package License::             @gnu{} General Public License.
* Documentation License::       @gnu{} Free Documentation License.
* references::                  Bibliography and references.

Indexes

* concept index::               An entry for each concept.
* function index::              An entry for each function.
* variable index::              An entry for each variable.
* type index::                  An entry for each type.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Overview of the distribution

* overview implementation::     Supported implementations.
* overview porting::            On writing portable code.
* overview libraries::          Other libraries.
* overview binfmt::             Launching Scheme programs directly.

The Scheme language

* lang overview::               Overview of Scheme.
* lang requirements::           Requirement levels.
* lang numbers::                Numbers.
* lang lex::                    Lexical syntax and datum syntax.
* lang basic::                  Semantic concepts.
* lang entry::                  Entry format.
* lang library::                Libraries.
* lang programs::               Top-level programs.
* lang syntax::                 Primitive syntax.
* lang expansion::              Expansion process.
* lang derived::                Sample definitions for derived forms.

Overview of Scheme

* lang overview intro::                 Introduction.
* lang overview basic types::        Basic types.
* lang overview expressions::        Expressions.
* lang overview variables::          Variables and binding.
* lang overview definitions::        Definitions.
* lang overview forms::              Forms.
* lang overview procedures::         Procedures.
* lang overview syntax::             Procedure calls and syntactic keywords.
* lang overview assignment::         Assignment.
* lang overview macros::             Derived forms and macros.
* lang overview data::               Syntactic data and datum values.
* lang overview continuations::      Continuations.
* lang overview libraries::          Libraries.
* lang overview programs::           Top--level programs.

Numbers

* lang numbers tower::          Numerical tower.
* lang numbers exactness::      Exactness.
* lang numbers fix flo::        Fixnums and flonums.
* lang numbers requirements::   Implementation requirements.
* lang numbers inf nan::        Infinities and NaNs.
* lang numbers minus zero::     Distinguished @math{-0.0}.

Lexical syntax and datum syntax

* lang lex intro::              Introduction.
* lang lex notation::           Notation.
* lang lex syntax::             Lexical syntax.
* lang lex datum::              Datum syntax.

Lexical syntax

* lang lex syntax formal account::           Formal account.
* lang lex syntax line endings::             Line endings.
* lang lex syntax whitespace and comments::  Whitespace and comments.
* lang lex syntax identifiers::              Identifiers.
* lang lex syntax booleans::                 Booleans.
* lang lex syntax characters::               Characters.
* lang lex syntax strings::                  Strings.
* lang lex syntax numbers::                  Numbers.

Datum syntax

* lang lex datum formal account::       Formal account.
* lang lex datum pairs and lists::      Pairs and lists.
* lang lex datum vectors::              Vectors.
* lang lex datum bytevectors::          Bytevectors.
* lang lex datum abbreviations::        Abbreviations.

Semantic concepts

* lang basic programs and libraries::        Programs and libraries.
* lang basic variables keywords regions::    Variables, keywords,
                                             and regions.
* lang basic exceptions::                    Exceptional situations.
* lang basic argument checking::             Argument checking.
* lang basic syntax violations::             Syntax violations.
* lang basic safety::                        Safety.
* lang basic boolean values::                Boolean values.
* lang basic multiple return values::        Multiple return values.
* lang basic unspecified behavior::          Unspecified behavior.
* lang basic storage model::                 Storage model.
* lang basic proper tail recursion::         Proper tail recursion.
* lang basic dynamic extent::                Dynamic extent and the
                                             dynamic environment.

Entry format

* lang entry syntax::                Syntax entries.
* lang entry procedure::             Procedure entries.
* lang entry implementation resp::   Implementation responsibilities.
* lang entry other kinds::           Other kinds of entries.
* lang entry equivalent::            Equivalent entries.
* lang entry evaluation examples::   Evaluation examples.
* lang entry naming conventions::    Naming conventions.

Libraries

* lang library form::           Library form.
* lang library import export::  Import and export levels.
* lang library examples::       Examples.

Library form

* lang library form decl::      Library declaration.
* lang library form names::     Library names.
* lang library form export::    The export specification.
* lang library form import::    The import specification.
* lang library form version::   The version reference.
* lang library form conflicts:: Handling conflicts.
* lang library form body::      Library bodies.

Top--level programs

* lang programs syntax::        Top-level program syntax.
* lang programs semantics::     Top-level program semantics.

Primitive syntax

* lang syntax primitive::       Primitive expression types.
* lang syntax macros::          Macros.

Base library

* baselib types::               Base types.
* baselib definitions::         Definitions.
* baselib bodies::              Bodies.
* baselib expressions::         Expressions.
* baselib predicates::          Equivalence and procedure predicates.
* baselib math::                Mathematics.
* baselib booleans::            Booleans.
* baselib lists::               Pairs and lists.
* baselib symbols::             Symbols.
* baselib characters::          Characters.
* baselib strings::             Strings.
* baselib vectors::             Vectors.
* baselib errors::              Errors and violations.
* baselib control::             Control features.
* baselib iteration::           Iteration.
* baselib quasiquotation::      Quasiquotation.
* baselib syntax binding::      Binding constructs for syntactic keywords.
* baselib transformers::        Macro transformers.
* baselib tail call::           Tail calls and tail contexts.

Definitions

* baselib definitions variables::  Variables definitions.
* baselib definitions syntax::     Syntax definitions.

Expressions

* baselib expressions quotation::       Quotation.
* baselib expressions procedures::      Procedures.
* baselib expressions conditionals::    Conditionals.
* baselib expressions assignments::     Assignments.
* baselib expressions derived cond::    Derived conditionals.
* baselib expressions binding::         Binding constructs.
* baselib expressions sequencing::      Sequencing.

Mathematics

* baselib math exactness::      Propagation of exactness and inexactness.
* baselib math infinities::     Representability of infinities and NaNs.
* baselib math semantics::      Semantics of common operations.
* baselib math ops::            Numerical operations.
* baselib math string::         Numerical input and output.

Semantics of common operations

* baselib math semantics integer::      Integer division.
* baselib math semantics trascend::     Transcendental functions.

Numerical operations

* baselib math ops type pred::          Numerical type predicates.
* baselib math ops exactness::          Generic conversion.
* baselib math ops value pred::         Value predicates.
* baselib math ops comparison::         Comparison.
* baselib math ops arithmetic::         Arithmetic operations.
* baselib math ops part::               Part separation.
* baselib math ops trascend::           Trascendental functions.
* baselib math ops exponentiation::     Exponentiation functions.
* baselib math ops complex::            Complex numbers functions.

Standard libraries

* stdlib unicode::              Unicode.
* stdlib bytevector::           Bytevectors.
* stdlib list::                 List utilities.
* stdlib sorting::              Sorting.
* stdlib control::              Control structures.
* stdlib records::              Records.
* stdlib exceptions::           Exceptions and conditions.
* stdlib io::                   Input/output.
* stdlib files::                File system.
* stdlib programlib::           Command line access and exit values.
* stdlib arithmetics::          Arithmetics.
* stdlib syntax-case::          Syntax-case.
* stdlib hashtable::            Hashtables.
* stdlib enum::                 Enumerations.
* stdlib complib::              Composite library.
* stdlib eval::                 Evaluation.
* stdlib mutable pairs::        Mutable pairs.
* stdlib mutable strings::      Mutable strings.
* stdlib rfive compat::         @rnrs{5} compatibility.

Unicode

* stdlib unicode characters::   Characters.
* stdlib unicode strings::      Strings.

Bytevectors

* stdlib bytevector endianness::        Endianness.
* stdlib bytevector general::           General operations.
* stdlib bytevector bytes and octets::  Operations on bytes and octets.
* stdlib bytevector integers::          Operations on integers of
                                        arbitrary size.
* stdlib bytevector integers 16::       Operations on 16-bit integers.
* stdlib bytevector integers 32::       Operations on 32-bit integers.
* stdlib bytevector integers 64::       Operations on 64-bit integers.
* stdlib bytevector flonum::            Operations on @ieee{} 754
                                        representations.
* stdlib bytevector strings::           Operations on strings.

Records

* stdlib records intro::                Introduction.
* stdlib records mutability::           Mutability and equivalence
                                        of records.
* stdlib records syntactic layer::      Syntactic layer.
* stdlib records procedural layer::     Procedural layer.
* stdlib records inspection::           Inspection.

Exceptions and conditions

* stdlib exceptions exceptions::        Exceptions.
* stdlib exceptions conditions::        Conditions.

Conditions

* stdlib exceptions conditions objects::        Condition objects.
* stdlib exceptions conditions types::          Standard condition types.

Input/output

* stdlib io conditions::        Condition types.
* stdlib io port::              Port input/output.
* stdlib io simple::            Simple input/output.

Port input/output

* stdlib io port file names::           File names.
* stdlib io port file options::         File options.
* stdlib io port buffer modes::         Buffer modes.
* stdlib io port transcoders::          Transcoders.
* stdlib io port eof object::           End of file object.
* stdlib io port io ports::             Input and output ports.
* stdlib io port input ports::          Input ports.
* stdlib io port binary input::         Binary input.
* stdlib io port textual input::        Textual input.
* stdlib io port output ports::         Output ports.
* stdlib io port binary output::        Binary output.
* stdlib io port textual output::       Textual output.
* stdlib io port input output ports::   Input/output ports.

Arithmetics

* stdlib arithmetics bitwise::          Bitwise operations.
* stdlib arithmetics fixnum::           Fixnums.
* stdlib arithmetics flonum::           Flonums.
* stdlib arithmetics exact bitwise::    Exact bitwise arithmetic.

Syntax--case

* stdlib syntax-case hygiene::          Hygiene.
* stdlib syntax-case objects::          Syntax objects.
* stdlib syntax-case transformers::     Transformers.
* stdlib syntax-case parsing::          Parsing input and producing
                                        output.
* stdlib syntax-case identifier::       Identifier predicates.
* stdlib syntax-case conversion::       Syntax-object and datum
                                        conversions.
* stdlib syntax-case temporaries::      Generating lists of temporaries.
* stdlib syntax-case derived::          Derived forms and procedures.
* stdlib syntax-case violations::       Syntax violations.

Examples

* stdlib syntax-case define-macro::     Common Lisp style macros.

Hashtables

* stdlib hashtable constructors::       Constructors.
* stdlib hashtable procedures::         Procedures.
* stdlib hashtable inspection::         Inspection.
* stdlib hashtable hash functions::     Hash functions.

The @library{nausicaa} language

* naulib features::             Feature-based conditional expansion.
* naulib funcs::                Functions.
* naulib pretty::               Pretty printing.
* naulib macros::               Syntactic abstractions.
* naulib parameters::           Paremeter objects.
* naulib shared::               External representation for data
                                with shared structure.
* naulib environment::          Accessing environment variables.
* naulib unimplemented::        Unimplemented error condition.

Predefined condition types

* conditions mismatch::         General mismatch error.

List library

* lists intro::                 Introduction.
* lists conventions::           Conventions.
* lists cons::                  Constructors.
* lists pred::                  Predicates.
* lists compar::                Comparison.
* lists select::                Selectors.
* lists misc::                  Length, append, concatenate,
                                reverse, zip and count.
* lists fold::                  Fold, unfold and map.
* lists filter::                Filtering and partitioning.
* lists search::                Searching.
* lists delete::                Deletion.
* lists sorted::                Utilities for sorted lists.
* lists alist::                 Association lists.
* lists circ::                  Circular lists.
* lists set::                   Set operations on lists.
* lists low::                   Low level utilities.

Fold, unfold and map

* lists fold examples::         Folding usage examples.
* lists fold rnrs::             Folding with @rnrs{6} style.
* lists fold traditional::      Folding with traditional style.
* lists fold derived::          Derived folding.
* lists fold pair::             Folding pairs.
* lists fold reduce::           Reducing.
* lists fold unfold::           Unfolding.
* lists fold map::              Mapping.

Character sets

* char-sets intro::             Introduction.
* char-sets make::              Constructors.
* char-sets pred::              Predicates.
* char-sets inspect::           Inspection.
* char-sets ops::               Operations.
* char-sets sets::              Predefined character sets.

Predefined character sets

* char-sets sets intro::        Introduction.
* char-sets sets how::          How predefined sets were defined.
* char-sets sets basic::        Basic character sets.
* char-sets sets ascii::        Sets of @ascii{} characters.
* char-sets sets blocks::       Sets corresponding to Unicode blocks.
* char-sets sets categories::   Sets corresponding to Unicode general
                                categories.

Strings library

* strings intro::               Introduction.
* strings convention::          Interface conventions.
* strings views::               Views over strings.
* strings cons::                Constructors.
* strings pred::                Predicates.
* strings compar::              Comparison.
* strings map::                 Mapping functions.
* strings case::                Case mapping.
* strings fold::                Fold and unfold.
* strings select::              Selection.
* strings pad::                 Padding and trimming.
* strings prefix::              Prefixes and suffixes.
* strings search::              Searching.
* strings filter::              Filtering and deleting.
* strings list::                List and string conversion.
* strings replicate::           Replicate and rotate.
* strings mutate::              Mutators.
* strings misc::                Miscellaneous functions.

Vectors library

* vectors intro::               Introduction.
* vectors convention::          Interface conventions.
* vectors views::               Views over vectors.
* vectors cons::                Constructors.
* vectors pred::                Predicates.
* vectors compar::              Comparison.
* vectors fold::                Fold and unfold.
* vectors select::              Selection.
* vectors pad::                 Padding and trimming.
* vectors prefix::              Prefixes and suffixes.
* vectors search::              Searching.
* vectors filter::              Filtering and deleting.
* vectors list::                List and vector conversion.
* vectors replicate::           Replicate and rotate.
* vectors mutate::              Mutators.
* vectors misc::                Miscellaneous functions.

Fold and unfold

* vectors fold rnrs::           Folding with @rnrs{6} style.
* vectors fold sub::            Folding over subvectors.
* vectors fold unfold::         Unfolding vectors.
* vectors fold map::            Mapping functions.

Multidimensional arrays

* arrays conventions::          Arguments conventions.
* arrays layout::               Layout of elements in the vector.
* arrays position::             Specifying the coordinates of elements.
* arrays shape::                Specifying the shape of arrays.
* arrays array::                Dealing with arrays.

Comparison functions

* comparisons intro::           Introduction.
* comparisons examples::        Examples.
* comparisons conventions::     Terminology and conventions.
* comparisons atoms::           Comparing atoms.
* comparisons sequence::        Comparing lists and vectors.
* comparisons pair::            Comparing pairs and improper lists.
* comparisons default::         The default compare procedure.
* comparisons cons::            Constructing compare procedures.
* comparisons branch::          Branching.
* comparisons pred::            Predicates.
* comparisons minmax::          Minimum and maximum values.
* comparisons debug::           Debugging procedure.

Loop constructs

* loops intro::                 Introduction.
* loops comprehensions::        Comprehensions.
* loops qualifiers::            Qualifiers.
* loops generators::            Generators.

Comprehensions

* loops comprehensions do::     Simple loops.
* loops comprehensions list::   List accumulator loops.
* loops comprehensions string:: String accumulator loops.
* loops comprehensions vector:: Vector accumulator loops.
* loops comprehensions arith::  Arithmetic accumulator loops.
* loops comprehensions search:: Searching loops.
* loops comprehensions fold::   Folding loops.
* loops comprehensions define:: Defining new comprehensions.

Generators

* loops generators intro::      Introduction to generators.
* loops generators do::         Loop generators.
* loops generators typed::      Typed generators.
* loops generators ranges::     Range generators.
* loops generators port::       Port generators.
* loops generators dispatch::   Dispatched generators.
* loops generators let::        Let generators.
* loops generators parallel::   Parallel generators.
* loops generators cond::       Conditional generators.

Sources of random bits

* random intro::                Introduction.
* random prng::                 Notes on the algorithms.
* random numbers::              Simple random numbers.
* random source::               Randomness sources.
* random mrg32k3a::             L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator
* random device::               Device--based generator.
* random utils::                Utilities.
* random generators::           Auxiliary generators.
* random dist::                 Random numbers from known distributions.

Notes on the algorithms

* random prng lcg::             Linear congruential generators.
* random prng mwc::             Multiply with carry.
* random prng csprng::          Cryptographically secure @acronym{PRNG}.
* random prng integers::        Generating integers in a specified range.
* random prng reals::           Generating real numbers.

Utilities

* random utils misc::           Miscellaneous utility functions.
* random utils lists::          Specialised list functions.
* random utils vectors::        Specialised vector functions.
* random utils strings::        Specialised string functions.

Auxiliary generators

* random generators mersenne::  The Mersenne twister.
* random generators marsaglia:: George Marsaglia's generators.
* random generators bbs::       Blum--Blum--Shub generator.
* random generators borosh::    Borosh generator.
* random generators cmrg::      Combined multiple recursive generator.

Formatting strings

* format overview::             Overview of the package.
* format output::               Formatted Output.
* format escape values::        Escape sequences for generic values.
* format escape char::          Escape sequences for characters.
* format escape integers::      Escape sequences for integers.
* format escape flonums::       Escape sequences for flonums.
* format escape complex::       Escape sequences for complex numbers.

Escape sequences for flonums

* format escape flonums fixed::        Fixed point format.
* format escape flonums exponent::     Exponential format.
* format escape flonums eng::          Engineering format.

Lightweight testing

* checks select::               Selecting tests to be run.
* checks eval::                 Evaluating code.
* checks result::               Handling multiple results.

Compensation stacks

* compensations usage::         Basic compensations usage.
* compensations api::           Compensations @api{}.

Deferred exceptions

* deferred exceptions intro::   Introduction.
* deferred exceptions usage::   Usage examples.
* deferred exceptions api::     Programming interface.

Record utilities

* records parents::             Records parents list.
* records makers::              Automatically generated makers.
* records fields::              Binding accessors and mutators.

A simple object system

* scmobj overview::             Overview of the library.
* scmobj example::              Objects layout examples.
* scmobj class::                Classes.
* scmobj instance::             Instances.
* scmobj inspect::              Inspecting classes and instances.
* scmobj slot::                 Accessing slots.
* scmobj generic::              Generic functions and methods.

Classes

* scmobj class make::           Making classes
* scmobj class chart::          A chart for predefined classes
* scmobj class core::           Core class types.
* scmobj class list::           List types.
* scmobj class compound::       Non-list compound data types.
* scmobj class numeric::        Numeric data types.
* scmobj class port::           Port types.
* scmobj class misc::           Miscellaneous types.

Generic functions and methods

* scmobj generic application::  How generic functions and methods
                                are invoked.
* scmobj generic dispatching::  How methods are dispatched.
* scmobj generic define::       Defining generic functions and methods.
* scmobj generic next::         Invoking the next method.
* scmobj generic examples::     Examples of method dispatching.

Nausicaa Object System

* nos builtin::                 Record type descriptors for builtins.
* nos records::                 Handling record types.
* nos methods::                 Multimethod dispatching.

Record type descriptors for builtin values

* nos builtin chart::           A chart for predefined @acronym{rtd}s.
* nos builtin rtd::             Conventional @acronym{rtd}s.

Multimethod dispatching

* nos methods application::     How generic functions and methods
                                are invoked.
* nos methods dispatching::     How methods are dispatched.
* nos methods define::          Defining generic functions and methods.
* nos methods next::            Invoking the next method.
* nos methods examples::        Examples of method dispatching.
* nos methods predefined::      Predefined generic functions.

Handling symbolic expressions

* sexps match::                 Plain matching.
* sexps operators::             Matching operators.
* sexps transform::             Transforming S--expressions.
* sexps macro::                 Macro transformers.

Pattern matching

* matches intro::               Introduction.
* matches match::               Basic pattern matching.
* matches condition::           Mismatch error condition.
* matches syntax::              The pattern syntax.

The pattern syntax

* matches syntax wildcard::     Matching anything with blind semantic
                                action.
* matches syntax literal::      Matching literal values.
* matches syntax clauses::      Multiple clauses.
* matches syntax quoted::       Matching quoted S--expressions.
* matches syntax lists::        Matching pairs and lists.
* matches syntax vectors::      Matching vectors.
* matches syntax variables::    Pattern variables.
* matches syntax pred::         Matching with predicates.
* matches syntax accessor::     Matching with accessor procedure.
* matches syntax logic::        Logic alternatives and negation.
* matches syntax quasiquote::   Matching quasiquotation.
* matches syntax getter::       Getting values out of the expression.
* matches syntax setter::       Mutating the expression's value.
* matches syntax continuation:: Continuing after mismatch.
* matches syntax ellipsis::     Matching an arbitrary number of
                                subexpressions.
* matches syntax macros::       Impossibility of using macros as
                                patterns.

IrRegular expressions

* irregex conventions::         Conventions.
* irregex pred::                Predicates.
* irregex compile::             Compiling regular expressions.
* irregex match::               Match objects.
* irregex replace::             Replacing substrings.
* irregex chunk::               Chunked string matching.
* irregex misc::                Miscellaneous functions.
* irregex pcre::                Supported @acronym{PCRE} syntax.
* irregex sre::                 Extended @acronym{SRE} syntax.

Extended @acronym{SRE} Syntax

* irregex sre syntax::          Syntax tables.
* irregex sre basic::           Basic patterns.
* irregex sre repetition::      Repetition patterns.
* irregex sre char-sets::       Character sets.
* irregex sre assertion::       Assertion patterns.
* irregex sre utility::         Utility patterns.

Portable regular expressions for Scheme

* pregexp intro::               Introduction.
* pregexp api::                 Interface procedures.
* pregexp syntax::              The regexp pattern language.
* pregexp example::             An extended example.

The regexp pattern language

* pregexp syntax basic::        Basic assertions.
* pregexp syntax chars::        Characters and character classes.
* pregexp syntax quantifiers::  Quantifiers.
* pregexp syntax clusters::     Clusters.
* pregexp syntax alternation::  Alternation.
* pregexp syntax backtrack::    Backtracking.
* pregexp syntax look::         Looking ahead and behind.

Lexer and parser utilities

* parser-tools location::       Source location records.
* parser-tools token::          Lexical token records.

Source location records

* parser-tools location type::          The record type.
* parser-tools location makers::        Building records.
* parser-tools location pred::          Predicates.
* parser-tools location cmp::           Comparison functions.
* parser-tools location update::        Updating the location.
* parser-tools location misc::          Miscellaneous functions.

Lexical token records

* parser-tools token type::     The record type.
* parser-tools token maker::    Record makers.
* parser-tools token pred::     Predicates.

A lexical analyser generator

* silex example::               A lexer example for a calculator.
* silex tables::                Creating lexer tables.
* silex input::                 Input systems.
* silex lexer::                 Building and using lexical analysers.
* silex syntax::                Syntax of the specification.
* silex semantics::             Semantics of the specification file.
* silex format::                Tables output format.

Syntax of the specification

* silex syntax macros::         Syntax of the macro definitions.
* silex syntax rules::          Syntax of the rule--action pairs.
* silex syntax regexp atomic::  Atomic regular expressions.
* silex syntax regexp compose:: Composing regular expressions.
* silex syntax regexp marker::  Markers.
* silex syntax regexp space::   White spaces in regular expressions.
* silex syntax sample::         Show some frequent mistakes.

Semantics of the specification

* silex semantics action::      What does an action do.
* silex semantics rules::       When does a regular expression
                                matches the input.

A LALR(1) parser generator

* lalr intro::                  Introduction to the LR parser.
* lalr tables::                 Creating parser tables.
* lalr lexer::                  Describing tokens.
* lalr parser::                 Running the parser.
* lalr grammar::                Defining the grammar.
* lalr glr::                    Generalised LR parsing.

Introduction to the LR parser

* lalr intro tokens::           Splitting expressions in
                                semantic tokens.
* lalr intro want::             What we want.
* lalr intro simple::           Simplified parser behaviour.
* lalr intro look::             Why the lookahead.
* lalr intro states::           From symbol sequences to states.
* lalr intro error::            Error recovering.
* lalr intro nonterm::          Non--terminal categories.

Defining the parser

* lalr grammar intro::          Introduction to grammar definition.
* lalr grammar precedence::     Operator precedence and associativity.
* lalr grammar clauses::        Writing semantic clauses.
* lalr grammar error::          Error recovery.
* lalr grammar conflict::       Conflicts resolution.
* lalr grammar examples::       Dummy examples of grammar definitions.

Error recovery

* lalr grammar error intro::    Introduction to error recovery.
* lalr grammar error single::   Dummy example: Single token parser.

Dummy examples of grammar definitions

* lalr grammar examples helpers:: Helper definitions.
* lalr grammar examples single::  Single token parser.

Packrat parser

* packrat calc::                Calculator example.
* packrat types::               Parser state and results.
* packrat comb::                Combinators.

Parser state and results

* packrat types state::         The parser state.
* packrat types result::        Combinators results.

Combinators

* packrat comb terminal::       Expecting a token category.
* packrat comb sequence::       Applying combinators in sequence.
* packrat comb or::             Applying alternative combinators.
* packrat comb unless::         Applying failure combinators.
* packrat comb memoize::        Memozing combinators.
* packrat comb error::          Returning error results.
* packrat comb grammar::        The grammar combinator.

Comma--separated value (@acronym{CSV}) utilities

* csv lexer::                   Low level tokenisation.
* csv parser::                  High level parsing.

Low level tokenisation

* csv lexer strings::           Tokenising strings.
* csv lexer unquoted-data::     Tokenising unquoted data.
* csv lexer full::              Full parsing.

Email processing

* email addresses::             Parsing email addresses.

Parsing email addresses

* email addresses components::  Parsed components.
* email addresses types::       Record types.
* email addresses lexer::       Splitting an address into tokens.
* email addresses parser::      Splitting an address into logical units.

Record types

* email addresses domain::              Domain.
* email addresses local-part::          Local part.
* email addresses addr-spec::           Address specification.
* email addresses route::               Route.
* email addresses mailbox::             Mailbox.
* email addresses group::               Group of mailboxes.

Infix notation utilities

* infix strings::               Converting strings.
* infix sexp::                  Converting S--expressions.

Foreign functions interface

* memory::                      Low level memory handling.
* ffi::                         Foreign functions interface.
* cstring::                     C language strings handling.
* errno::                       C language system errors.

Low level memory handling

* memory conditions::           Out of memory errors.
* memory pointers::             Pointer objects.
* memory alloc::                Allocation functions.
* memory bytevectors::          Bytevectors conversion.
* memory blocks::               Memory blocks.
* memory buffers::              Memory buffers.
* memory cache::                Caching memory blocks.
* memory factory::              Caching object factories.
* memory compensate::           Compensations.
* memory buffer alloc::         Allocation in a buffer.
* memory refcount::             Reference counting.
* memory operations::           Operations.
* memory peekers::              Peeking values.
* memory pokers::               Pokers values.
* memory array peekers::        Peeking values into arrays.
* memory array pokers::         Poking values into arrays.

Independent libraries

* guarded malloc::              Guarded memory allocation.

Foreign functions interface

* ffi example::                 Basic interface to Zlib.
* ffi load::                    Dynamic loading of libraries.
* ffi call::                    Interface functions.
* ffi sizeof::                  Sizes and limits.
* ffi headers::                 Inspecting foreign header files.

Functions interface

* ffi call types::              Interface to C language types.
* ffi call out::                Calling foreign functions.
* ffi call in::                 Calling Scheme functions.

C language strings handling

* cstring inspection::          Inspecting cstrings.
* cstring operations::          Acting upon cstrings.
* cstring conversion::          Converting to and from cstrings.
* cstring argv::                Converting arrays of cstrings.

C language system errors

* errno values::                Error codes.
* errno conversion::            Conversion of error codes.
* errno condition::             Raising exceptions.

Knuth-Morris-Pratt searching

* kmp intro::                   Introduction.
* kmp conv::                    Conventions.
* kmp vector::                  The restart vector.
* kmp step::                    Single step of the search.
* kmp partial::                 Partial search.
* kmp full::                    Full sequence search.

One dimensional extended ranges

* one-dimension intro::         Data types and conventions.
* one-dimension make::          Constructors.
* one-dimension pred::          Predicates.
* one-dimension inspect::       Inspection.
* one-dimension ops::           Operations.

Miscellaneous notes on everything

* notes nan::                   How to deal with not--a--number.

How to deal with not--a--number

* notes nan inf::               How to deal with infinities.
* notes nan nan::               Understanding not--a--number.

Launching programs directly

* binfmt overview::             Overview of the mechanism.
* binfmt loading::              Loading the module.
* binfmt registry::             The registry.
* binfmt using::                Using the mechanism.
* binfmt control::              Controlling the mechanism.
* binfmt hints::                Hints.
* binfmt scheme::               Running Scheme programs.

Scheme programming examples

* examples macros::             Exploring macro mechanisms.

Exploring macro mechanisms

* examples macros phases::      Bits about phases.
* examples macros underscore::  About the underscore.
* examples macros patterns::    About writing patterns.
* examples macros literals::    About literal identifiers.
* examples macros syntax::      Syntax objects and you.

Syntax objects and you

* examples macros syntax not::   What we do not do.

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@end ifnottex


@c page
@node overview
@chapter Overview of the distribution


@value{PACKAGE} is a set of Scheme libraries defining a slightly
modified @rnrs{6} Scheme language and augmenting the features of the
base and standard @rnrs{6} libraries.  To use it when writing a library
or program, we import @library{nausicaa} in place of @library{rnrs}:

@example
(import (nausicaa)
  ---)
@end example

@noindent
the only way to use the @library{nausicaa} library is as language
definition, if we try to import both @library{nausicaa} and @library{rnrs}
conflicts may arise.


@menu
* overview implementation::     Supported implementations.
* overview porting::            On writing portable code.
* overview libraries::          Other libraries.
* overview binfmt::             Launching Scheme programs directly.
@end menu

@c page
@node overview implementation
@section Supported implementations


@value{PACKAGE} supports the following Scheme implementations:

@table @strong
@item Larceny
It is an also @rnrs{6} compliant implementation of the Scheme
programming language.  It is the creation of William D.  Clinger, Lars T
Hansen and Lightship Software, Incorporated, with contributions by other
people.

@center @url{http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/will/Larceny/}

@item Ikarus
It is an almost @rnrs{6} compliant implementation of the Scheme
programming language.  It is the creation of Abdulaziz Ghuloum.

@center @url{http://launchpad.net/ikarus}

@item Mosh
It is an @rnrs{6} compliant implementation of the Scheme programming
language.  It is the creation of Taro Minowa (higepon).

@center @url{http://code.google.com/p/mosh-scheme/}

@item Ypsilon
It is an @rnrs{6} compliant implementation of the Scheme programming
language.  It is the creation of Yoshikatsu Fujita at LittleWing
Company.

@center @url{http://code.google.com/p/ypsilon/}
@end table

@noindent
when referring to all of these we can use the @acronym{LIMY}
abbreviation.

@c page
@node overview porting
@section On writing portable code


Some Scheme implementation defines itself as @rnrs{6} compliant, but
then does not provide a compliant implementation of some of the
features.  Also, the @rnrs{6} language has some limitations and
underspecifications.

@value{PACKAGE} tries, through the @library{nausicaa} language, to fill
some (not all) of the gaps and to provide a base language to write
portable programs among the supported Scheme implementations.

@library{nausicaa} has the following purposes:

@itemize
@item
To make available all the bindings from @library{rnrs}.

@item
To make self--defining @rnrs{6} Scheme implementations more @rnrs{6}
compliant, in the sense of ``programs that work''.  This means, for
example: If an underlying implementation does not provide a requested
function, @library{nausicaa} tries to provide a working replacement.

@item
To offer by default some features from the @srfi{} libraries which where
voted to @emph{final} status.  It may be that those features are
redefined or extended.

@item
To change the specification of some function to make it more usable.
@end itemize

This document describes the features of the @rnrs{6} language by
embedding the original @rnrs{6} documents; these specifications are
available in the chapters:

@itemize -
@item
@ref{lang,The Scheme language}.

@item
@ref{baselib,Base library}.

@item
@ref{stdlib,Standard libraries}.
@end itemize

@noindent
the features of @library{nausicaa} that extend the @library{rnrs} language
are described in the chapter @ref{naulib,The augmented language}.


@c page
@node overview libraries
@section Other libraries


In addition to the focus on code portability among @rnrs{6} Scheme
implementations, the Nausicaa distribution is concerned to provide a
good base of features and interfaces to foreign libraries (mostly coded
in the C language).

With these purposes, @value{PACKAGE} installs libraries implementing,
reimplementing or extending some of the @srfi{}s that were voted to
@emph{final} status, and providing a unified @api{} to the foreign
functions interfaces of the underlying implementations.

@c page
@node overview binfmt
@section Launching Scheme programs directly


The appendix @ref{binfmt,Launching programs directly} describes an
optional feature of @value{PACKAGE} that activates Scheme programs
execution through the mechanism of the @code{binfmt_misc} Linux kernel
module.  It is available only on Unix--like platforms running the Linux
kernel.

@c page
@node lang
@chapter The Scheme language


@menu
* lang overview::               Overview of Scheme.
* lang requirements::           Requirement levels.
* lang numbers::                Numbers.
* lang lex::                    Lexical syntax and datum syntax.
* lang basic::                  Semantic concepts.
* lang entry::                  Entry format.
* lang library::                Libraries.
* lang programs::               Top-level programs.
* lang syntax::                 Primitive syntax.
* lang expansion::              Expansion process.
* lang derived::                Sample definitions for derived forms.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang overview
@section Overview of Scheme

@c originally this chapter was the "struct" file.

This chapter gives an overview of Scheme's semantics.  The purpose of
this overview is to explain enough about the basic concepts of the
language to facilitate understanding of the subsequent chapters of the
report, which are organized as a reference manual.  Consequently, this
overview is neither a complete introduction to the language, nor precise
in all respects, nor normative in any way.

@menu
* lang overview intro::                 Introduction.
* lang overview basic types::        Basic types.
* lang overview expressions::        Expressions.
* lang overview variables::          Variables and binding.
* lang overview definitions::        Definitions.
* lang overview forms::              Forms.
* lang overview procedures::         Procedures.
* lang overview syntax::             Procedure calls and syntactic keywords.
* lang overview assignment::         Assignment.
* lang overview macros::             Derived forms and macros.
* lang overview data::               Syntactic data and datum values.
* lang overview continuations::      Continuations.
* lang overview libraries::          Libraries.
* lang overview programs::           Top--level programs.
@end menu

@c page
@node lang overview intro
@subsection Introduction


Following Algol, Scheme is a statically scoped programming language.
Each use of a variable is associated with a lexically apparent binding
of that variable.

Scheme has @dfn{latent} as opposed to @dfn{manifest} types.  Types are
associated with objects (also called values) rather than with variables.
(Some authors refer to languages with latent types as untyped, weakly
typed or dynamically typed languages.)  Other languages with latent
types are Python, Ruby, Smalltalk, and other dialects of Lisp.
Languages with manifest types (sometimes referred to as strongly typed
or statically typed languages) include Algol 60, C, C#, Java, Haskell,
and ML.

All objects created in the course of a Scheme computation, including
procedures and continuations, have unlimited extent.  No Scheme object
is ever destroyed.  The reason that implementations of Scheme do not
(usually!) run out of storage is that they are permitted to reclaim the
storage occupied by an object if they can prove that the object cannot
possibly matter to any future computation.  Other languages in which
most objects have unlimited extent include C#, Java, Haskell, most Lisp
dialects, ML, Python, Ruby, and Smalltalk.

Implementations of Scheme must be properly tail--recursive.  This allows
the execution of an iterative computation in constant space, even if the
iterative computation is described by a syntactically recursive
procedure.  Thus with a properly tail--recursive implementation,
iteration can be expressed using the ordinary procedure--call mechanics,
so that special iteration constructs are useful only as syntactic sugar.

Scheme was one of the first languages to support procedures as objects
in their own right.  Procedures can be created dynamically, stored in
data structures, returned as results of procedures, and so on.  Other
languages with these properties include Common Lisp, Haskell, ML, Ruby,
and Smalltalk.

One distinguishing feature of Scheme is that continuations, which in
most other languages only operate behind the scenes, also have
``first--class'' status.  First--class continuations are useful for
implementing a wide variety of advanced control constructs, including
non--local exits, backtracking, and coroutines.

In Scheme, the argument expressions of a procedure call are evaluated
before the procedure gains control, whether the procedure needs the
result of the evaluation or not.  C, C#, Common Lisp, Python, Ruby, and
Smalltalk are other languages that always evaluate argument expressions
before invoking a procedure.  This is distinct from the lazy--evaluation
semantics of Haskell, or the call--by--name semantics of Algol 60, where
an argument expression is not evaluated unless its value is needed by
the procedure.

Scheme's model of arithmetic provides a rich set of numerical types and
operations on them.  Furthermore, it distinguishes @dfn{exact} and
@dfn{inexact} number objects: Essentially, an exact number object
corresponds to a number exactly, and an inexact number object is the
result of a computation that involved rounding or other errors.


@c page
@node lang overview basic types
@subsection Basic types


Scheme programs manipulate @dfn{objects}, which are also referred to as
@dfn{values}.  Scheme objects are organized into sets of values called
@dfn{types}.  This section gives an overview of the fundamentally
important types of the Scheme language.  More types are described in
later chapters.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} As Scheme is latently typed, the use of the term
@emph{type} in this report differs from the use of the term in the
context of other languages, particularly those with manifest typing.
@end quotation

@subsubheading Booleans

A boolean is a truth value, and can be either true or false.  In Scheme,
the object for ``false'' is written @false{}.  The object for ``true''
is written @true{}.  In most places where a truth value is expected,
however, any object different from @false{} counts as true.

@subsubheading Numbers

Scheme supports a rich variety of numerical data types, including
objects representing integers of arbitrary precision, rational numbers,
complex numbers, and inexact numbers of various kinds.  @ref{lang
numbers, Numbers}

@subsubheading Characters

Scheme characters mostly correspond to textual characters.  More
precisely, they are isomorphic to the @dfn{scalar values} of the Unicode
standard.

@subsubheading Strings

Strings are finite sequences of characters with fixed length and thus
represent arbitrary Unicode texts.

@subsubheading Symbols

A symbol is an object representing a string, the symbol's @dfn{name}.
Unlike strings, two symbols whose names are spelled the same way are
never distinguishable.  Symbols are useful for many applications; for
instance, they may be used the way enumerated values are used in other
languages.

@subsubheading Pairs and lists

A pair is a data structure with two components.  The most common use of
pairs is to represent (singly linked) lists, where the first component
(the @dfn{car}) represents the first element of the list, and the second
component (the @dfn{cdr}) the rest of the list.  Scheme also has a
distinguished empty list, which is the last cdr in a chain of pairs that
form a list.

@subsubheading Vectors

Vectors, like lists, are linear data structures representing finite
sequences of arbitrary objects.  Whereas the elements of a list are
accessed sequentially through the chain of pairs representing it, the
elements of a vector are addressed by integer indices.  Thus, vectors
are more appropriate than lists for random access to elements.

@subsubheading Procedures

Procedures are values in Scheme.

@c page
@node lang overview expressions
@subsection Expressions


The most important elements of Scheme code are @dfn{expressions}.
Expressions can be @dfn{evaluated}, producing a @dfn{value}.  (Actually,
any number of values.  @ref{lang basic multiple return values, Multiple
return values}.)

The most fundamental expressions are literal expressions:

@example
#t @result{} #t
23 @result{} 23
@end example

@noindent
this notation means that the expression @samp{#t} evaluates to @true{},
that is, the value for ``true'', and that the expression @samp{23}
evaluates to a number object representing the number @math{23}.

Compound expressions are formed by placing parentheses around their
subexpressions.  The first subexpression identifies an operation; the
remaining subexpressions are operands to the operation:

@example
(+ 23 42)               @result{} 65
(+ 14 (* 23 42))        @result{} 980
@end example

@noindent
in the first of these examples, @func{+} is the name of the built--in
operation for addition, and @samp{23} and @samp{42} are the operands.
The expression @code{(+ 23 42)} reads as ``the sum of @math{23} and
@math{42}''.  Compound expressions can be nested---the second example
reads as ``the sum of @math{14} and the product of @math{23} and
@math{42}''.

As these examples indicate, compound expressions in Scheme are always
written using the same prefix notation.  As a consequence, the
parentheses are needed to indicate structure.  Consequently,
``superfluous'' parentheses, which are often permissible in mathematical
notation and also in many programming languages, are not allowed in
Scheme.

As in many other languages, whitespace (including line endings) is not
significant when it separates subexpressions of an expression, and can
be used to indicate structure.

@c page
@node lang overview variables
@subsection Variables and binding


Scheme allows identifiers to stand for locations containing values.
These identifiers are called variables.  In many cases, specifically
when the location's value is never modified after its creation, it is
useful to think of the variable as standing for the value directly.

@example
(let ((x 23)
      (y 42))
  (+ x y))
@result{} 65
@end example

In this case, the expression starting with @func{let} is a binding
construct.  The parenthesized structure following the @func{let} lists
variables alongside expressions: the variable @samp{x} alongside
@samp{23}, and the variable @samp{y} alongside @samp{42}.  The
@func{let} expression binds @samp{x} to @samp{23}, and @samp{y} to
@samp{42}.  These bindings are available in the @emph{body} of the
@func{let} expression, @code{(+ x y)}, and only there.

@c page
@node lang overview definitions
@subsection Definitions


The variables bound by a @func{let} expression are @emph{local}, because
their bindings are visible only in @func{let}'s body.  Scheme also
allows creating top--level bindings for identifiers as follows:

@example
(define x 23)
(define y 42)
(+ x y) @result{} 65
@end example

@noindent
these are actually ``top--level'' in the body of a top--level program
or library.  @ref{lang library, Libraries}.

The first two parenthesized structures are @dfn{definitions}; they
create top--level bindings, binding @samp{x} to @samp{23} and @samp{y}
to @samp{42}.  Definitions are not expressions, and cannot appear in all
places where an expression can occur.  Moreover, a definition has no
value.

Bindings follow the lexical structure of the program: When several
bindings with the same name exist, a variable refers to the binding that
is ``closest'' to it, starting with its occurrence in the program and
going from inside to outside, and referring to a top--level binding if
no local binding can be found along the way:

@example
(define x 23)
(define y 42)
(let ((y 43))
  (+ x y)) @result{} 66

(let ((y 43))
  (let ((y 44))
    (+ x y))) @result{} 67
@end example

@c page
@node lang overview forms
@subsection Forms


While definitions are not expressions, compound expressions and
definitions exhibit similar syntactic structure:

@example
(define x 23)
(* x 2)
@end example

While the first line contains a definition, and the second an
expression, this distinction depends on the bindings for @func{let} and
@func{*}.  At the purely syntactical level, both are @dfn{forms}, and
@dfn{form} is the general name for a syntactic part of a Scheme program.
In particular, @samp{23} is a @emph{subform} of the form @code{(define x
23)}.

@c page
@node lang overview procedures
@subsection Procedures


Definitions can also be used to define procedures:

@example
(define (f x)
  (+ x 42))

(f 23) @result{} 65
@end example

A procedure is, slightly simplified, an abstraction of an expression
over objects.  In the example, the first definition defines a procedure
called @func{f}.  (Note the parentheses around @code{f x}, which
indicate that this is a procedure definition.)  The expression @code{(f
23)} is a procedure call, meaning, roughly, ``evaluate @code{(+ x 42)}
(the body of the procedure) with @samp{x} bound to @samp{23}''.

As procedures are objects, they can be passed to other procedures:

@example
(define (f x)
  (+ x 42))

(define (g p x)
  (p x))

(g f 23) @result{} 65
@end example

@noindent
In this example, the body of @func{g} is evaluated with @var{p} bound to
@func{f} and @samp{x} bound to @samp{23}, which is equivalent to
@code{(f 23)}, which evaluates to @samp{65}.

In fact, many predefined operations of Scheme are provided not by
syntax, but by variables whose values are procedures.  The @func{+}
operation, for example, which receives special syntactic treatment in
many other languages, is just a regular identifier in Scheme, bound to a
procedure that adds number objects.  The same holds for @func{*} and
many others:

@example
(define (h op x y)
  (op x y))

(h + 23 42) @result{} 65
(h * 23 42) @result{} 966
@end example

Procedure definitions are not the only way to create procedures.  A
@func{lambda} expression creates a new procedure as an object, with no
need to specify a name:

@example
((lambda (x) (+ x 42)) 23) @result{} 65
@end example

The entire expression in this example is a procedure call; @code{(lambda
(x) (+ x 42))}, evaluates to a procedure that takes a single number
object and adds 42 to it.

@c page
@node lang overview syntax
@subsection Procedure calls and syntactic keywords


Whereas @code{(+ 23 42)}, @code{(f 23)}, and @code{((lambda (x) (+ x
42)) 23)} are all examples of procedure calls, @func{lambda} and
@func{let} expressions are not.  This is because @func{let}, even though
it is an identifier, is not a variable, but is instead a @dfn{syntactic
keyword}.  A form that has a syntactic keyword as its first
subexpression obeys special rules determined by the keyword.  The
@func{let} identifier in a definition is also a syntactic keyword.
Hence, definitions are also not procedure calls.

The rules for the @func{lambda} keyword specify that the first subform
is a list of parameters, and the remaining subforms are the body of the
procedure.  In @func{let} expressions, the first subform is a list of
binding specifications, and the remaining subforms constitute a body of
expressions.

Procedure calls can generally be distinguished from these @dfn{special
forms} by looking for a syntactic keyword in the first position of a
form: if the first position does not contain a syntactic keyword, the
expression is a procedure call.  (So--called @emph{identifier macros}
allow creating other kinds of special forms, but are comparatively
rare.)  The set of syntactic keywords of Scheme is fairly small, which
usually makes this task fairly simple.  It is possible, however, to
create new bindings for syntactic keywords.  @ref{lang overview macros,
Derived forms and macros}

@c page
@node lang overview assignment
@subsection Assignment


Scheme variables bound by definitions or @func{let} or @func{lambda}
expressions are not actually bound directly to the objects specified in
the respective bindings, but to locations containing these objects.  The
contents of these locations can subsequently be modified destructively
via @dfn{assignment}:

@example
(let ((x 23))
  (set! x 42)
  x) @result{} 42
@end example

In this case, the body of the @func{let} expression consists of two
expressions which are evaluated sequentially, with the value of the
final expression becoming the value of the entire @func{let} expression.
The expression @code{(set! x 42)} is an assignment, saying ``replace the
object in the location referenced by @samp{x} with @samp{42}''.  Thus,
the previous value of @samp{x}, @samp{23}, is replaced by @samp{42}.

@c page
@node lang overview macros
@subsection Derived forms and macros


Many of the special forms specified in this report can be translated
into more basic special forms.  For example, a @func{let} expression can
be translated into a procedure call and a @func{lambda} expression.  The
following two expressions are equivalent:

@example
(let ((x 23)
      (y 42))
  (+ x y))
@result{} 65

((lambda (x y) (+ x y)) 23 42)
@result{} 65
@end example

Special forms like @func{let} expressions are called @dfn{derived forms}
because their semantics can be derived from that of other kinds of forms
by a syntactic transformation.  Some procedure definitions are also
derived forms.  The following two definitions are equivalent:

@example
(define (f x)
  (+ x 42))

(define f
  (lambda (x)
    (+ x 42)))
@end example

In Scheme, it is possible for a program to create its own derived forms
by binding syntactic keywords to macros:

@example
(define-syntax def
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((def f (p ...) body)
     (define (f p ...)
       body))))

(def f (x)
  (+ x 42))
@end example

The @func{define-syntax} construct specifies that a parenthesized
structure matching the pattern @code{(def f (p ...) body)}, where
@samp{f}, @samp{p}, and @samp{body} are pattern variables, is translated
to @code{(define (f p ...) body)}.  Thus, the @samp{def} form appearing
in the example gets translated to:

@example
(define (f x)
  (+ x 42))
@end example

The ability to create new syntactic keywords makes Scheme extremely
flexible and expressive, allowing many of the features built into other
languages to be derived forms in Scheme.

@c page
@node lang overview data
@subsection Syntactic data and datum values


A subset of the Scheme objects is called @dfn{datum values}.  These
include booleans, number objects, characters, symbols, and strings as
well as lists and vectors whose elements are data.  Each datum value may
be represented in textual form as a @dfn{syntactic datum}, which can be
written out and read back in without loss of information.  A datum value
may be represented by several different syntactic data.  Moreover, each
datum value can be trivially translated to a literal expression in a
program by prepending a @samp{'} (single quote) to a corresponding
syntactic datum:

@example
'23             @result{} 23
'#t             @result{} #t
'foo            @result{} foo
'(1 2 3)        @result{} (1 2 3)
'#(1 2 3)       @result{} #(1 2 3)
@end example

The @samp{'} shown in the previous examples is not needed for
representations of number objects or booleans.  The syntactic datum
@samp{foo} represents a symbol with name ``foo'', and @samp{'foo} is a
literal expression with that symbol as its value.  @samp{(1 2 3)} is a
syntactic datum that represents a list with elements @samp{1}, @samp{2},
and @samp{3}, and @samp{'(1 2 3)} is a literal expression with this list
as its value.  Likewise, @samp{#(1 2 3)} is a syntactic datum that
represents a vector with elements @samp{1}, @samp{2} and @samp{3}, and
@samp{'#(1 2 3)} is the corresponding literal.

The syntactic data are a superset of the Scheme forms.  Thus, data can
be used to represent Scheme forms as data objects.  In particular,
symbols can be used to represent identifiers.

@example
'(+ 23 42)                 @result{} (+ 23 42)
'(define (f x) (+ x 42))   @result{} (define (f x) (+ x 42))
@end example

This facilitates writing programs that operate on Scheme source code, in
particular interpreters and program transformers.

@c page
@node lang overview continuations
@subsection Continuations


Whenever a Scheme expression is evaluated there is a @dfn{continuation}
wanting the result of the expression.  The continuation represents an
entire (default) future for the computation.  For example, informally
the continuation of @code{3} in the expression

@example
(+ 1 3)
@end example

@noindent
adds 1 to it.  Normally these ubiquitous continuations are hidden behind
the scenes and programmers do not think much about them.  On rare
occasions, however, a programmer may need to deal with continuations
explicitly.

The @func{call-with-current-continuation} procedure allows Scheme
programmers to do that by creating a procedure that reinstates the
current continuation.  @ref{baselib control, Control features}

The @func{call-with-current-continuation} procedure accepts a procedure,
calls it immediately with an argument that is an @emph{escape
procedure}.  This escape procedure can then be called with an argument
that becomes the result of the call to
@func{call-with-current-continuation}.  That is, the escape procedure
abandons its own continuation, and reinstates the continuation of the
call to @func{call-with-current-continuation}.

In the following example, an escape procedure representing the
continuation that adds @samp{1} to its argument is bound to
@code{escape}, and then called with @samp{3} as an argument.  The
continuation of the call to @code{escape} is abandoned, and instead the
@samp{3} is passed to the continuation that adds @samp{1}:

@example
(+ 1 (call-with-current-continuation
       (lambda (escape)
         (+ 2 (escape 3)))))
@result{} 4
@end example

An escape procedure has unlimited extent: It can be called after the
continuation it captured has been invoked, and it can be called multiple
times.  This makes @func{call-with-current-continuation} significantly
more powerful than typical non--local control constructs such as
exceptions in other languages.

@c page
@node lang overview libraries
@subsection Libraries


Scheme code can be organized in components called @dfn{libraries}.  Each
library contains definitions and expressions.  It can import definitions
from other libraries and export definitions to other libraries.

The following library called @samp{(hello)} exports a definition called
@func{hello-world}, and imports the base library and the simple I/O
library.  The @func{hello-world} export is a procedure that displays
@samp{Hello World} on a separate line:

@example
(library (hello)
  (export hello-world)
  (import (rnrs base)
          (rnrs io simple))
  (define (hello-world)
    (display "Hello World")
    (newline)))
@end example

@c page
@node lang overview programs
@subsection Top--level programs


A Scheme program is invoked via a @dfn{top--level program}.  Like a
library, a top--level program contains imports, definitions and
expressions, and specifies an entry point for execution.  Thus a
top--level program defines, via the transitive closure of the libraries
it imports, a Scheme program.

The following top--level program obtains the first argument from the
command line via the @func{command-line} procedure from the
@rsixlibrary{programs} library.  It then opens the file using
@func{open-file-input-port}, yielding a @emph{port}, i.e. a connection
to the file as a data source, and calls the @func{get-bytes-all}
procedure to obtain the contents of the file as binary data.  It then
uses @func{put-bytes} to output the contents of the file to standard
output:

@example
#!r6rs
(import (rnrs base)
        (rnrs io ports)
        (rnrs programs))
(let ((p (standard-output-port)))
  (put-bytevector p
                  (call-with-port
                      (open-file-input-port
                        (cadr (command-line)))
                    get-bytevector-all))
  (close-port p))
@end example

@c page
@node lang requirements
@section Requirement levels


The key words ``must'', ``must not'', ``should'', ``should not'',
``recommended'', ``may'', and ``optional'' in this report are to be
interpreted as described in @rfc{} 2119.  Specifically:

@table @strong
@item must
This word means that a statement is an absolute requirement of the
specification.

@item must not
This phrase means that a statement is an absolute prohibition of the
specification.

@item should
This word, or the adjective ``recommended'', means that valid reasons
may exist in particular circumstances to ignore a statement, but that
the implications must be understood and weighed before choosing a
different course.

@item should not
This phrase, or the phrase ``not recommended'', means that valid reasons
may exist in particular circumstances when the behavior of a statement
is acceptable, but that the implications should be understood and
weighed before choosing the course described by the statement.

@item may
This word, or the adjective ``optional'', means that an item is truly
optional.
@end table

In particular, this report occasionally uses ``should'' to designate
circumstances that are outside the specification of this report, but
cannot be practically detected by an implementation.  @ref{lang basic
argument checking, Arguments checking}.  In such circumstances, a
particular implementation may allow the programmer to ignore the
recommendation of the report and even exhibit reasonable behavior.
However, as the report does not specify the behavior, these programs may
be unportable, that is, their execution might produce different results
on different implementations.

Moreover, this report occasionally uses the phrase ``not required'' to
note the absence of an absolute requirement.

@c page
@node lang numbers
@section Numbers


This chapter describes Scheme's model for numbers.  It is important to
distinguish between the mathematical numbers, the Scheme objects that
attempt to model them, the machine representations used to implement the
numbers, and notations used to write numbers.

In this report, the term @dfn{number} refers to a mathematical number,
and the term @dfn{number object} refers to a Scheme object representing
a number.  This report uses the types @dfn{complex}, @dfn{real},
@dfn{rational}, and @dfn{integer} to refer to both mathematical numbers
and number objects.  The @dfn{fixnum} and @dfn{flonum} types refer to
special subsets of the number objects, as determined by common machine
representations, as explained below.

@menu
* lang numbers tower::          Numerical tower.
* lang numbers exactness::      Exactness.
* lang numbers fix flo::        Fixnums and flonums.
* lang numbers requirements::   Implementation requirements.
* lang numbers inf nan::        Infinities and NaNs.
* lang numbers minus zero::     Distinguished @math{-0.0}.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang numbers tower
@subsection Numerical tower


Numbers may be arranged into a tower of subsets in which each level is a
subset of the level above it:

@example
number
  complex
  real
  rational
  integer
@end example

For example, 5 is an integer.  Therefore 5 is also a rational, a real,
and a complex.  The same is true of the number objects that model 5.

Number objects are organized as a corresponding tower of subtypes
defined by the predicates @code{number?}, @code{complex?}, @code{real?},
@code{rational?}, and @code{ integer?}.  @ref{baselib math ops type
pred, Numerical types predicates}.  Integer number objects are also
called @dfn{integer objects}.

There is no simple relationship between the subset that contains a
number and its representation inside a computer.  For example, the
integer 5 may have several representations.  Scheme's numerical
operations treat number objects as abstract data, as independent of
their representation as possible.  Although an implementation of Scheme
may use many different representations for numbers, this should not be
apparent to a casual programmer writing simple programs.

@c page
@node lang numbers exactness
@subsection Exactness


It is useful to distinguish between number objects that are known to
correspond to a number exactly, and those number objects whose
computation involved rounding or other errors.  For example, index
operations into data structures may need to know the index exactly, as
may some operations on polynomial coefficients in a symbolic algebra
system.  On the other hand, the results of measurements are inherently
inexact, and irrational numbers may be approximated by rational and
therefore inexact approximations.  In order to catch uses of numbers
known only inexactly where exact numbers are required, Scheme explicitly
distinguishes @emph{exact} from @emph{inexact} number objects.  This
distinction is orthogonal to the dimension of type.

A number object is exact if it is the value of an exact numerical
literal or was derived from exact number objects using only exact
operations.  Exact number objects correspond to mathematical numbers in
the obvious way.

Conversely, a number object is inexact if it is the value of an inexact
numerical literal, or was derived from inexact number objects, or was
derived using inexact operations.  Thus inexactness is contagious.

Exact arithmetic is reliable in the following sense: If exact number
objects are passed to any of the arithmetic procedures described in
@ref{baselib math exactness, Propagation of exactness and inexactness},
and an exact number object is returned, then the result is
mathematically correct.  This is generally not true of computations
involving inexact number objects because approximate methods such as
floating--point arithmetics may be used, but it is the duty of each
implementation to make the result as close as practical to the
mathematically ideal result.

@c page
@node lang numbers fix flo
@subsection Fixnums and flonums


A @dfn{fixnum} is an exact integer object that lies within a certain
implementation--dependent subrange of the exact integer objects.
@ref{stdlib arithmetics fixnum, Fixnums}

Likewise, every implementation must designate a subset of its inexact
real number objects as @dfn{flonums}, and to convert certain external
representations into flonums.  @ref{stdlib arithmetics flonum, Flonums}

Note that this does not imply that an implementation must use
floating--point representations.

@c page
@node lang numbers requirements
@subsection Implementation requirements


Implementations of Scheme must support number objects for the entire
tower of subtypes given in @ref{lang numbers tower, Numerical tower}.
Moreover, implementations must support exact integer objects and exact
rational number objects of practically unlimited size and precision, and
to implement certain procedures (listed in @ref{baselib math exactness,
Propagation of exactness and inexactness}), so they always return exact
results when given exact arguments.  (``Practically unlimited'' means
that the size and precision of these numbers should only be limited by
the size of the available memory.)

Implementations may support only a limited range of inexact number
objects of any type, subject to the requirements of this section.  For
example, an implementation may limit the range of the inexact real
number objects (and therefore the range of inexact integer and rational
number objects) to the dynamic range of the flonum format.  Furthermore
the gaps between the inexact integer objects and rationals are likely to
be very large in such an implementation as the limits of this range are
approached.

An implementation may use floating point and other approximate
representation strategies for @emph{inexact} numbers.  This report
recommends, but does not require, that the @ieee{} floating--point
standards be followed by implementations that use floating--point
representations, and that implementations using other representations
should match or exceed the precision achievable using these
floating--point standards.

In particular, implementations that use floating--point representations
must follow these rules: A floating--point result must be represented
with at least as much precision as is used to express any of the inexact
arguments to that operation.  Potentially inexact operations such as
@func{sqrt}, when applied to exact arguments, should produce exact
answers whenever possible (for example the square root of an exact 4
ought to be an exact 2).  However, this is not required.  If, on the
other hand, an exact number object is operated upon so as to produce an
inexact result (as by @func{sqrt}), and if the result is represented in
floating point, then the most precise floating--point format available
must be used; but if the result is represented in some other way then
the representation must have at least as much precision as the most
precise floating--point format available.

It is the programmer's responsibility to avoid using inexact number
objects with magnitude or significand too large to be represented in the
implementation.


@c page
@node lang numbers inf nan
@subsection Infinities and NaNs


Some Scheme implementations, specifically those that follow the @ieee{}
floating--point standards, distinguish special number objects called
@dfn{positive infinity}, @dfn{negative infinity} and @dfn{NaN}.

Positive infinity is regarded as an inexact real (but not rational)
number object that represents an indeterminate number greater than the
numbers represented by all rational number objects.  Negative infinity
is regarded as an inexact real (but not rational) number object that
represents an indeterminate number less than the numbers represented by
all rational numbers.

A NaN is regarded as an inexact real (but not rational) number object so
indeterminate that it might represent any real number, including
positive or negative infinity, and might even be greater than positive
infinity or less than negative infinity.

@c page
@node lang numbers minus zero
@subsection Distinguished @math{-0.0}


Some Scheme implementations, specifically those that follow the @ieee{}
floating--point standards, distinguish between number objects for
@math{0.0} and @math{-0.0}, i.e., positive and negative inexact zero.
This report will sometimes specify the behavior of certain arithmetic
operations on these number objects.  These specifications are marked
with ``if @math{-0.0} is distinguished'' or ``implementations that
distinguish @math{-0.0}''.


@c page
@node lang lex
@section Lexical syntax and datum syntax


@menu
* lang lex intro::              Introduction.
* lang lex notation::           Notation.
* lang lex syntax::             Lexical syntax.
* lang lex datum::              Datum syntax.
@end menu

@c page
@node lang lex intro
@subsection Introduction


The syntax of Scheme code is organized in three levels:

@enumerate
@item
The @dfn{lexical syntax} that describes how a program text is split
into a sequence of lexemes.

@item
The @dfn{datum syntax}, formulated in terms of the lexical syntax, that
structures the lexeme sequence as a sequence of @dfn{syntactic data},
where a syntactic datum is a recursively structured entity.

@item
The @dfn{program syntax} formulated in terms of the datum syntax,
imposing further structure and assigning meaning to syntactic data.
@end enumerate

Syntactic data (also called @dfn{external representations}) double as a
notation for objects, and Scheme's @rsixlibrary{io ports} library
provides the @func{get-datum} and @func{put-datum} procedures for
reading and writing syntactic data, converting between their textual
representation and the corresponding objects.  @ref{stdlib io port, Port
input/output}.  Each syntactic datum represents a corresponding
@emph{datum value}.  A syntactic datum can be used in a program to
obtain the corresponding datum value using @func{quote}.  @ref{baselib
expressions quotation, Quotation}

Scheme source code consists of syntactic data and (non--significant)
comments.  Syntactic data in Scheme source code are called @emph{forms}.
(A form nested inside another form is called a @emph{subform}.)
Consequently, Scheme's syntax has the property that any sequence of
characters that is a form is also a syntactic datum representing some
object.  This can lead to confusion, since it may not be obvious out of
context whether a given sequence of characters is intended to be a
representation of objects or the text of a program.  It is also a source
of power, since it facilitates writing programs such as interpreters or
compilers that treat programs as objects (or vice versa).

A datum value may have several different external representations.  For
example, both @code{#e28.000} and @code{#x1c} are syntactic data
representing the exact integer object 28, and the syntactic data
@code{(8 13)}, @code{( 08 13 )}, @code{(8 . (13 . ()))} all represent a
list containing the exact integer objects 8 and 13.  Syntactic data that
represent equal objects (in the sense of @func{equal?}; @ref{baselib
predicates}) are always equivalent as forms of a program.

Because of the close correspondence between syntactic data and datum
values, this report sometimes uses the term @emph{datum} for either a
syntactic datum or a datum value when the exact meaning is apparent from
the context.

An implementation must not extend the lexical or datum syntax in any
way, with one exception: it need not treat the syntax
@code{#!<identifier>}, for any <identifier> (@ref{lang lex syntax
identifiers}) that is not @code{r6rs}, as a syntax violation, and it may
use specific @code{#!}--prefixed identifiers as flags indicating that
subsequent input contains extensions to the standard lexical or datum
syntax.  The syntax @code{#!r6rs} may be used to signify that the input
afterward is written with the lexical syntax and datum syntax described
by this report.  @code{#!r6rs} is otherwise treated as a comment;
@ref{lang lex syntax whitespace and comments}.

@c page
@node lang lex notation
@subsection Notation


The formal syntax for Scheme is written in an extended @acronym{BNF}.
Non--terminals are written using angle brackets.  Case is insignificant
for non--terminal names.

All spaces in the grammar are for legibility.  @meta{empty} stands for
the empty string.

The following extensions to @acronym{BNF} are used to make the
description more concise: @arbno{@meta{thing}} means zero or more
occurrences of @meta{thing}, and @atleastone{@meta{thing}} means at
least one @meta{thing}.

Some non-terminal names refer to the Unicode scalar values of the same
name: @meta{character tabulation} (U+0009), @meta{linefeed} (U+000A),
@meta{carriage return} (U+000D), @meta{line tabulation} (U+000B),
@meta{form feed} (U+000C), @meta{space} (U+0020), @meta{next line}
(U+0085), @meta{line separator} (U+2028), and @meta{paragraph separator}
(U+2029).


@c page
@node lang lex syntax
@subsection Lexical syntax


The lexical syntax determines how a character sequence is split into a
sequence of lexemes, omitting non--significant portions such as comments
and whitespace.  The character sequence is assumed to be text according
to the Unicode standard.  Some of the lexemes, such as identifiers,
representations of number objects, strings etc., of the lexical syntax
are syntactic data in the datum syntax, and thus represent objects.
Besides the formal account of the syntax, this section also describes
what datum values are represented by these syntactic data.

The lexical syntax, in the description of comments, contains a forward
reference to @meta{datum}, which is described as part of the datum
syntax.  Being comments, however, these @meta{datum}s do not play a
significant role in the syntax.

Case is significant except in representations of booleans, number
objects, and in hexadecimal numbers specifying Unicode scalar values.
For example, @code{#x1A} and @code{#X1a} are equivalent.  The identifier
@code{Foo} is, however, distinct from the identifier @code{FOO}.


@menu
* lang lex syntax formal account::           Formal account.
* lang lex syntax line endings::             Line endings.
* lang lex syntax whitespace and comments::  Whitespace and comments.
* lang lex syntax identifiers::              Identifiers.
* lang lex syntax booleans::                 Booleans.
* lang lex syntax characters::               Characters.
* lang lex syntax strings::                  Strings.
* lang lex syntax numbers::                  Numbers.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang lex syntax formal account
@subsubsection Formal account


@noindent
@meta{interlexeme space} may occur on either side of any lexeme, but not
within a lexeme.

@meta{Identifier}s, @samp{.}, @meta{number}s, @meta{character}s, and
@meta{boolean}s, must be terminated by a @meta{delimiter} or by the end
of the input.

The following two characters are reserved for future extensions to the
language: @code{@{ @}}

@example
<lexeme> -> <identifier> | <boolean> | <number>
         | <character> | <string>
         | ( | ) | [ | ] | #( | #vu8( | ' | ` | , | ,@@ | .
         | #' | #` | #, | #,@@
<delimiter> -> ( | ) | [ | ] | " | ; | #
         | <whitespace>
<whitespace> -> <character tabulation>
         | <linefeed> | <line tabulation> | <form feed>
         | <carriage return> | <next line>
         | <any character whose category is Zs, Zl, or Zp>
<line ending> -> <linefeed> | <carriage return>
         | <carriage return> <linefeed> | <next line>
         | <carriage return> <next line> | <line separator>
<comment> -> ; <all subsequent characters up to a <line ending>
                or <paragraph separator> >
         | <nested comment>
         | #; <interlexeme space> <datum>
         | #!r6rs
<nested comment> -> #| <comment text>
         <comment cont>* |#
<comment text> -> character sequence not containing #| or |#
<comment cont> -> <nested comment> <comment text>
<atmosphere> -> <whitespace> | <comment>
<interlexeme space> -> <atmosphere>*

<identifier> -> <initial> <subsequent>*
         | <peculiar identifier>
<initial> -> <constituent> | <special initial>
         | <inline hex escape>
<letter> -> a | b | c | ... | z
         | A | B | C | ... | Z
<constituent> -> <letter>
         | <any character whose Unicode scalar value is greater than
             127, and whose category is Lu, Ll, Lt, Lm, Lo, Mn,
             Nl, No, Pd, Pc, Po, Sc, Sm, Sk, So, or Co>
<special initial> -> ! | $ | % | & | * | / | : | < | =
         | > | ? | ^ | _ | ~
<subsequent> -> <initial> | <digit>
         | <any character whose category is Nd, Mc, or Me>
         | <special subsequent>
<digit> -> 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
<hex digit> -> <digit>
         | a | A | b | B | c | C | d | D | e | E | f | F
<special subsequent> -> + | - | . | @@
<inline hex escape> -> \x<hex scalar value>;
<hex scalar value> -> <hex digit>+
<peculiar identifier> -> + | - | ... | -> <subsequent>*
<boolean> -> #t | #T | #f | #F
<character> -> #\<any character>
         | #\<character name>
         | #\x<hex scalar value>
<character name> -> nul | alarm | backspace | tab
         | linefeed | newline | vtab | page | return
         | esc | space | delete
<string> -> " <string element>* "
<string element> -> <any character other than " or \>
         | \a | \b | \t | \n | \v | \f | \r
         | \" | \\
         | \<intraline whitespace>* <line ending>
            <intraline whitespace>*
         | <inline hex escape>
<intraline whitespace> -> <character tabulation>
         | <any character whose category is Zs>
@end example

A @meta{hex scalar value} represents a Unicode scalar value between
@code{0} and @code{#x10FFFF}, excluding the range @code{[#D800,
#xDFFF]}.

The rules for @meta{num R}, @meta{complex R}, @meta{real R}, @meta{ureal
R}, @meta{uinteger R}, and @meta{prefix R} below should be replicated
for R = 2, 8, 10, and 16.  There are no rules for @meta{decimal 2},
@meta{decimal 8}, and @meta{decimal 16}, which means that number
representations containing decimal points or exponents must be in
decimal radix.

@example
<number> -> <num 2> | <num 8>
         | <num 10> | <num 16>
<num R> -> <prefix R> <complex R>
<complex R> -> <real R> | <real R> @@ <real R>
         | <real R> + <ureal R> i | <real R> - <ureal R> i
         | <real R> + <naninf> i | <real R> - <naninf> i
         | <real R> + i | <real R> - i
         | + <ureal R> i | - <ureal R> i
         | + <naninf> i | - <naninf> i
         | + i | - i
<real R> -> <sign> <ureal R>
         | + <naninf> | - <naninf>
<naninf> -> nan.0 | inf.0
<ureal R> -> <uinteger R>
         | <uinteger R> / <uinteger R>
         | <decimal R> <mantissa width>
<decimal 10> -> <uinteger 10> <suffix>
         | . <digit 10>+ <suffix>
         | <digit 10>+ . <digit 10>* <suffix>
         | <digit 10>+ . <suffix>
<uinteger R> -> <digit R>+
<prefix R> -> <radix R> <exactness>
         | <exactness> <radix R>

<suffix> -> <empty>
         | <exponent marker> <sign> <digit 10>+
<exponent marker> -> e | E | s | S | f | F
         | d | D | l | L
<mantissa width> -> <empty>
         | | <digit 10>+
<sign> -> <empty> | + | -
<exactness> -> <empty>
         | #i| #I | #e| #E
<radix 2> -> #b| #B
<radix 8> -> #o| #O
<radix 10> -> <empty> | #d | #D
<radix 16> -> #x| #X
<digit 2> -> 0 | 1
<digit 8> -> 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7
<digit 10> -> <digit>
<digit 16> -> <hex digit>
@end example


@c page
@node lang lex syntax line endings
@subsubsection Line endings


Line endings are significant in Scheme in single--line comments
(@ref{lang lex syntax whitespace and comments}) and within string
literals.  In Scheme source code, any of the line endings in @meta{line
ending} marks the end of a line.  Moreover, the two--character line
endings @meta{carriage return} @meta{linefeed} and @meta{carriage
return} @meta{next line} each count as a single line ending.

In a string literal, a @meta{line ending} not preceded by a @code{\}
stands for a linefeed character, which is the standard line--ending
character of Scheme.


@c page
@node lang lex syntax whitespace and comments
@subsubsection Whitespace and comments


@emph{Whitespace} characters are spaces, linefeeds, carriage returns,
character tabulations, form feeds, line tabulations, and any other
character whose category is Zs, Zl, or Zp.  Whitespace is used for
improved readability and as necessary to separate lexemes from each
other.  Whitespace may occur between any two lexemes, but not within a
lexeme.  Whitespace may also occur inside a string, where it is
significant.

The lexical syntax includes several comment forms.  In all cases,
comments are invisible to Scheme, except that they act as delimiters,
so, for example, a comment cannot appear in the middle of an identifier
or representation of a number object.

A semicolon (@code{;}) indicates the start of a line comment.  The
comment continues to the end of the line on which the semicolon appears.

Another way to indicate a comment is to prefix a @meta{datum} (cf.
section ``Formal account'') with @code{#;}, possibly with
@meta{interlexeme space} before the @meta{datum}.  The comment consists
of the comment prefix @code{#;} and the @meta{datum} together.  This
notation is useful for ``commenting out'' sections of code.

Block comments may be indicated with properly nested @code{#|} and
@code{|#} pairs.

@example
#|
   The FACT procedure computes the factorial of a
   non-negative integer.
|#
(define fact
  (lambda (n)
    ;; base case
    (if (= n 0)
        #;(= n 1)
        1       ; identity of *
        (* n (fact (- n 1))))))
@end example

The lexeme @code{#!r6rs}, which signifies that the program text that
follows is written with the lexical and datum syntax described in this
report, is also otherwise treated as a comment.


@c page
@node lang lex syntax identifiers
@subsubsection Identifiers


@cindex Identifier, definition of
@cindex Definition of identifier


Most identifiers allowed by other programming languages are also
acceptable to Scheme.  In general, a sequence of letters, digits, and
``extended alphabetic characters'' is an identifier when it begins with
a character that cannot begin a representation of a number object.  In
addition, @code{+}, @code{-}, and @code{...} are identifiers, as is a
sequence of letters, digits, and extended alphabetic characters that
begins with the two--character sequence @code{->}.  Here are some
examples of identifiers:

@example
lambda         q                soup
list->vector   +                V17a
<=             a34kTMNs         ->-
the-word-recursion-has-many-meanings
@end example

Extended alphabetic characters may be used within identifiers as if they
were letters.  The following are extended alphabetic characters:

@example
! $ % & * + - . / : < = > ? @@ ^ _ ~
@end example

Moreover, all characters whose Unicode scalar values are greater than
127 and whose Unicode category is Lu, Ll, Lt, Lm, Lo, Mn, Mc, Me, Nd,
Nl, No, Pd, Pc, Po, Sc, Sm, Sk, So, or Co can be used within
identifiers.  In addition, any character can be used within an
identifier when specified via an @meta{inline hex escape}.  For example,
the identifier @code{H\x65;llo} is the same as the identifier
@code{Hello}.
@c , and the identifier @code{\x3BB;} is the same as the
@c identifier $\lambda$.

Any identifier may be used as a variable or as a syntactic keyword
(@ref{lang basic variables keywords regions} and @ref{lang syntax
macros}) in a Scheme program.  Any identifier may also be used as a
syntactic datum, in which case it represents a @emph{symbol}
(@ref{baselib symbols}).


@c page
@node lang lex syntax booleans
@subsubsection Booleans


The standard boolean objects for true and false have external
representations @true{} and @false{}.


@c page
@node lang lex syntax characters
@subsubsection Characters


Characters are represented using the notation @code{#\<character>} or
@code{#<character name>} or @code{#x<hex scalar value>}.

For example:

@example
#\a             lower case letter a
#\A             upper case letter A
#\(             left parenthesis
#\              space character
#\nul           U+0000
#\alarm         U+0007
#\backspace     U+0008
#\tab           U+0009
#\linefeed      U+000A
#\newline       U+000A
#\vtab          U+000B
#\page          U+000C
#\return        U+000D
#\esc           U+001B
#\space         U+0020 preferred way to write a space
#\delete        U+007F
#\xFF           U+00FF
#\x03BB         U+03BB
#\x00006587     U+6587
#\x0001z        &lexical exception
#\alarmx        &lexical exception
#\alarm x       U+0007 followed by x
#\Alarm         &lexical exception
#\alert         &lexical exception
#\xA            U+000A
#\xFF           U+00FF
#\xff           U+00FF
#\x ff          U+0078 followed by another datum, ff
#\x(ff)         U+0078 followed by another datum, a parenthesized ff
#\(x)           &lexical exception
#\(x            &lexical exception
#\((x)          U+0028 followed by another datum, parenthesized x
#\x00110000     &lexical exception out of range
#\x000000001    U+0001
#\xD800         &lexical exception in excluded range
@end example

(The notation @code{&lexical} means that the line in question is a
lexical syntax violation.)

Case is significant in @code{#\<character>}, and in @code{#\<character
name>}, but not in the @code{<hex scalar value>} of @code{#\x<hex scalar
value>}.  A @meta{character} must be followed by a @meta{delimiter} or
by the end of the input.  This rule resolves various ambiguous cases
involving named characters, requiring, for example, the sequence of
characters @code{#\space} to be interpreted as the space character
rather than as the character @code{#\s} followed by the identifier
@code{pace}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The @code{#\newline} notation is retained for backward
compatibility.  Its use is deprecated; @code{#\linefeed} should be used
instead.
@end quotation


@c page
@node lang lex syntax strings
@subsubsection Strings


String are represented by sequences of characters enclosed within
doublequotes (@code{"}).  Within a string literal, various escape
sequences represent characters other than themselves.  Escape sequences
always start with a backslash (@code{\}):

@table @code
@item \a
alarm, U+0007
@item \b
backspace, U+0008
@item \t
character tabulation, U+0009
@item \n
linefeed, U+000A
@item \v
line tabulation, U+000B
@item \f
formfeed, U+000C
@item \r
return, U+000D
@item \"
doublequote, U+0022
@item \
backslash, U+005C
@item \<intraline whitespace><line ending> <intraline whitespace>
nothing
@item \x<hex scalar value>;
specified character (note the terminating semi--colon).
@end table

These escape sequences are case-sensitive, except that the alphabetic
digits of a @meta{hex scalar value} can be uppercase or lowercase.

Any other character in a string after a backslash is a syntax violation.
Except for a line ending, any character outside of an escape sequence
and not a doublequote stands for itself in the string literal.
@c For example the single--character string literal {\tt "$\lambda$"}
@c (doublequote, a lower case lambda, doublequote) represents the same
@c string as {\tt "\{}x03bb;"}.
A line ending that does not follow a backslash stands for a linefeed
character.

Examples:

@example
"abc"           U+0061, U+0062, U+0063
"\x41;bc"       "Abc" ; U+0041, U+0062, U+0063
"\x41; bc"      "A bc"
                U+0041, U+0020, U+0062, U+0063
"\x41bc;"       U+41BC
"\x41"          &lexical exception
"\x;"           &lexical exception
"\x41bx;"       &lexical exception
"\x00000041;"   "A" ; U+0041
"\x0010FFFF;"   U+10FFFF
"\x00110000;"   &lexical exception
                out of range
"\x000000001;"  U+0001
"\xD800;"       &lexical exception
                in excluded range
"A
bc"             U+0041, U+000A, U+0062, U+0063
                if no space occurs after the A
@end example


@c page
@node lang lex syntax numbers
@subsubsection Numbers


The syntax of external representations for number objects is described
formally by the @meta{number} rule in the formal grammar.  Case is not
significant in external representations of number objects.

A representation of a number object may be written in binary, octal,
decimal, or hexadecimal by the use of a radix prefix.  The radix
prefixes are @code{#b} (binary), @code{#o} (octal), @code{#d} (decimal),
and @code{#x} (hexadecimal).  With no radix prefix, a representation of
a number object is assumed to be expressed in decimal.

A representation of a number object may be specified to be either exact
or inexact by a prefix.  The prefixes are @code{#e} for exact, and
@code{#i} for inexact.  An exactness prefix may appear before or after
any radix prefix that is used.  If the representation of a number object
has no exactness prefix, the constant is inexact if it contains a
decimal point, an exponent, or a nonempty mantissa width; otherwise it
is exact.

In systems with inexact number objects of varying precisions, it may be
useful to specify the precision of a constant.  For this purpose,
representations of number objects may be written with an exponent marker
that indicates the desired precision of the inexact representation.  The
letters @code{s}, @code{f}, @code{d}, and @code{l} specify the use of
@emph{short}, @emph{single}, @emph{double}, and @emph{long} precision,
respectively.  (When fewer than four internal inexact representations
exist, the four size specifications are mapped onto those available.
For example, an implementation with two internal representations may map
short and single together and long and double together.)  In addition,
the exponent marker @code{e} specifies the default precision for the
implementation.  The default precision has at least as much precision as
@emph{double}, but implementations may wish to allow this default to be
set by the user.

@example
3.1415926535898F0
       Round to single, perhaps 3.141593
0.6L0
       Extend to long, perhaps .600000000000000
@end example

A representation of a number object with nonempty mantissa width,
@code{x|p}, represents the best binary floating--point approximation of
@emph{x} using a @emph{p}--bit significand.  For example, @code{1.1|53}
is a representation of the best approximation of 1.1 in @ieee{} double
precision.  If @emph{x} is an external representation of an inexact real
number object that contains no vertical bar, then its numerical value
should be computed as though it had a mantissa width of 53 or more.

Implementations that use binary floating--point representations of real
number objects should represent @code{x|p} using a @emph{p}--bit
significand if practical, or by a greater precision if a @emph{p}--bit
significand is not practical, or by the largest available precision if
@emph{p} or more bits of significand are not practical within the
implementation.

@quotation
@emph{Note} The precision of a significand should not be confused with
the number of bits used to represent the significand.  In the @ieee{}
floating--point standards, for example, the significand's most
significant bit is implicit in single and double precision but is
explicit in extended precision.  Whether that bit is implicit or
explicit does not affect the mathematical precision.  In implementations
that use binary floating point, the default precision can be calculated
by calling the following procedure:

@example
(define (precision)
  (do ([n 0 (+ n 1)]
       [x 1.0 (/ x 2.0)])
    ((= 1.0 (+ 1.0 x)) n)))
@end example
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note} When the underlying floating--point representation is
@ieee{} double precision, the @code{|p} suffix should not always be
omitted: Denormalized floating--point numbers have diminished precision,
and therefore their external representations should carry a @code{|p}
suffix with the actual width of the significand.
@end quotation

The literals @code{+inf.0} and @code{-inf.0} represent positive and
negative infinity, respectively.  The @code{+nan.0} literal represents
the NaN that is the result of @code{(/ 0.0 0.0)}, and may represent
other NaNs as well.  The @code{-nan.0} literal also represents a NaN.

If @emph{x} is an external representation of an inexact real number
object and contains no vertical bar and no exponent marker other than
@code{e}, the inexact real number object it represents is a flonum (see
library section ``Flonums'').  Some or all of the other external
representations of inexact real number objects may also represent
flonums, but that is not required by this report.


@c page
@node lang lex datum
@subsection Datum syntax


The datum syntax describes the syntax of syntactic data in terms of a
sequence of @meta{lexeme}s, as defined in the lexical syntax.

Syntactic data include the lexeme data described in the previous section
as well as the following constructs for forming compound data:

@itemize
@item
pairs and lists, enclosed by @code{( )} or @code{[ ]};

@item
vectors;

@item
bytevectors.
@end itemize


@menu
* lang lex datum formal account::       Formal account.
* lang lex datum pairs and lists::      Pairs and lists.
* lang lex datum vectors::              Vectors.
* lang lex datum bytevectors::          Bytevectors.
* lang lex datum abbreviations::        Abbreviations.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang lex datum formal account
@subsubsection Formal account


The following grammar describes the syntax of syntactic data in terms of
various kinds of lexemes defined in the grammar in @ref{lang lex
syntax,Lexical Syntax}

@example
<datum> -> <lexeme datum>
         | <compound datum>
<lexeme datum> -> <boolean> | <number>
         | <character> | <string> | <symbol>
<symbol> -> <identifier>
<compound datum> -> <list> | <vector> | <bytevector>
<list> -> (<datum>*) | [<datum>*]
         | (<datum>+ . <datum>) | [<datum>+ . <datum>]
         | <abbreviation>
<abbreviation> -> <abbrev prefix> <datum>
<abbrev prefix> -> ' | ` | , | ,@@
         | #' | #` | #, | #,@@
<vector> -> #(<datum>*)
<bytevector> -> #vu8(<u8>*)
<u8> -> <any <number> representing an exact integer in @{0, ..., 255@}>
@end example


@c page
@node lang lex datum pairs and lists
@subsubsection Pairs and lists


List and pair data, representing pairs and lists of values are
represented using parentheses or brackets.  Matching pairs of brackets
that occur in the rules of @meta{list} are equivalent to matching pairs
of parentheses.

The most general notation for Scheme pairs as syntactic data is the
``dotted'' notation @code{(<datum1> . <datum2>)} where @meta{datum1} is
the representation of the value of the car field and @meta{datum2} is
the representation of the value of the cdr field.  For example @code{(4
. 5)} is a pair whose car is 4 and whose cdr is 5.

A more streamlined notation can be used for lists: the elements of the
list are simply enclosed in parentheses and separated by spaces.  The
empty list is represented by @code{( )}.  For example,

@example
(a b c d e)
@end example

@noindent
and:

@example
(a . (b . (c . (d . (e . ())))))
@end example

@noindent
are equivalent notations for a list of symbols.

The general rule is that, if a dot is followed by an open parenthesis,
the dot, open parenthesis, and matching closing parenthesis can be
omitted in the external representation.

The sequence of characters @code{(4 . 5)} is the external representation
of a pair, not an expression that evaluates to a pair.  Similarly, the
sequence of characters @code{(+ 2 6)} is @emph{not} an external
representation of the integer 8, even though it @emph{is} an expression
(in the language of the @rsixlibrary{base} library) evaluating to the
integer 8; rather, it is a syntactic datum representing a three--element
list, the elements of which are the symbol @code{+} and the integers 2
and 6.


@c page
@node lang lex datum vectors
@subsubsection Vectors


Vector data, representing vectors of objects, are represented using the
notation @code{#(<datum> ...)}.  For example, a vector of length 3
containing the number object for zero in element 0, the list @code{(2 2
2 2)} in element 1, and the string @code{"Anna"} in element 2 can be
represented as follows:

@example
#(0 (2 2 2 2) "Anna")
@end example

This is the external representation of a vector, not an expression that
evaluates to a vector.


@c page
@node lang lex datum bytevectors
@subsubsection Bytevectors


Bytevector data, representing bytevectors (@ref{stdlib bytevector}), are
represented using the notation @code{#vu8(<u8> ...)}, where the
@meta{u8}s represent the octets of the bytevector.  For example, a
bytevector of length 3 containing the octets 2, 24, and 123 can be
represented as follows:

@example
#vu8(2 24 123)
@end example

This is the external representation of a bytevector, and also an
expression that evaluates to a bytevector.


@c page
@node lang lex datum abbreviations
@subsubsection Abbreviations


@example
 '<datum>        `<datum>        ,<datum>
,@@<datum>       #'<datum>       #`<datum>
#,<datum>      #,@@<datum>
@end example

Each of these is an abbreviation:

@table @code
@item '<datum>
for @code{(quote <datum>)},

@item `<datum>
for @code{(quasiquote <datum>)},

@item ,<datum>
for @code{(unquote <datum>)},

@item ,@@<datum>
for @code{(unquote-splicing <datum>)},

@item #'<datum>
for @code{(syntax <datum>)},

@item #`<datum>
for @code{(quasisyntax <datum>)},

@item #,<datum>
for @code{(unsyntax <datum>)}, and

@item #,@@<datum>
for @code{(unsyntax-splicing <datum>)}.
@end table


@c page
@node lang basic
@section Semantic concepts

@ignore
In the original document this chapter was the "basic.tex" file.
@end ignore

@menu
* lang basic programs and libraries::        Programs and libraries.
* lang basic variables keywords regions::    Variables, keywords,
                                             and regions.
* lang basic exceptions::                    Exceptional situations.
* lang basic argument checking::             Argument checking.
* lang basic syntax violations::             Syntax violations.
* lang basic safety::                        Safety.
* lang basic boolean values::                Boolean values.
* lang basic multiple return values::        Multiple return values.
* lang basic unspecified behavior::          Unspecified behavior.
* lang basic storage model::                 Storage model.
* lang basic proper tail recursion::         Proper tail recursion.
* lang basic dynamic extent::                Dynamic extent and the
                                             dynamic environment.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang basic programs and libraries
@subsection Programs and libraries


A Scheme program consists of a @emph{top--level} program together with a
set of @emph{libraries}, each of which defines a part of the program
connected to the others through explicitly specified exports and
imports.

@itemize
@item
A library consists of a set of export and import specifications and a
body, which consists of definitions, and expressions.

@item
A top--level program is similar to a library, but has no export
specifications.
@end itemize

Chapters ``Libraries'' and ``Top--level programs'' describe the syntax
and semantics of libraries and top--level programs, respectively.
Chapter ``Base library'' describes a base library that defines many of
the constructs traditionally associated with Scheme.  A separate report
describes the various @emph{standard libraries} provided by a Scheme
system.

The division between the base library and the other standard libraries
is based on use, not on construction.  In particular, some facilities
that are typically implemented as ``primitives'' by a compiler or the
run--time system rather than in terms of other standard procedures or
syntactic forms are not part of the base library, but are defined in
separate libraries.  Examples include the fixnums and flonums libraries,
the exceptions and conditions libraries, and the libraries for records.


@c page
@node lang basic variables keywords regions
@subsection Variables, keywords, and regions


@cindex Keyword, definition of
@cindex Definition of keyword

@cindex Variable, definition of
@cindex Definition of variable

@cindex Environment, definition of
@cindex Definition of environment

@cindex Binding constructs, definition of
@cindex Definition of binding constructs

@cindex Definitions, definition of
@cindex Definition of definitions

@cindex Region, definition of
@cindex Definition of region


Within the body of a library or top--level program, an identifier may
name a kind of syntax, or it may name a location where a value can be
stored.  An identifier that names a kind of syntax is called a
@emph{keyword}, and is said to be @emph{bound} to that kind of syntax
(or, in the case of a syntactic abstraction, a @emph{transformer} that
translates the syntax into more primitive forms).  An identifier that
names a location is called a @emph{variable} and is said to be
@emph{bound} to that location.  At each point within a top--level
program or a library, a specific, fixed set of identifiers is bound.
The set of these identifiers, the set of @emph{visible bindings}, is
known as the @emph{environment} in effect at that point.

Certain forms are used to create syntactic abstractions and to bind
keywords to transformers for those new syntactic abstractions, while
other forms create new locations and bind variables to those locations.
Collectively, these forms are called @emph{binding constructs}.  Some
binding constructs take the form of @emph{definitions}, while others are
expressions.  With the exception of exported library bindings, a binding
created by a definition is visible only within the body in which the
definition appears, e.g. the body of a library, top--level program, or
@func{lambda} expression.  Exported library bindings are also visible
within the bodies of the libraries and top--level programs that import
them.

Expressions that bind variables include the @func{lambda}, @func{let},
@func{let*}, @func{letrec}, @func{letrec*}, @func{let-values}, and
@func{let*-values} forms from the base library.  Of these, @func{lambda}
is the most fundamental.  Variable definitions appearing within the body
of such an expression, or within the bodies of a library or top--level
program, are treated as a set of @func{letrec*} bindings.  In addition,
for library bodies, the variables exported from the library can be
referenced by importing libraries and top--level programs.

Expressions that bind keywords include the @func{let-syntax} and
@func{letrec-syntax} forms.  A @func{define} form is a definition that
creates a variable binding, and a @code{define-syntax} form is a
definition that creates a keyword binding.

Scheme is a statically scoped language with block structure.  To each
place in a top--level program or library body where an identifier is
bound there corresponds a @emph{region} of code within which the binding
is visible.  The region is determined by the particular binding
construct that establishes the binding; if the binding is established by
a @func{lambda} expression, for example, then its region is the entire
@func{lambda} expression.  Every mention of an identifier refers to the
binding of the identifier that establishes the innermost of the regions
containing the use.  If a use of an identifier appears in a place where
none of the surrounding expressions contains a binding for the
identifier, the use may refer to a binding established by a definition
or import at the top of the enclosing library or top--level program.  If
there is no binding for the identifier, it is said to be @emph{unbound}.


@c page
@node lang basic exceptions
@subsection Exceptional situations


A variety of exceptional situations are distinguished in this report,
among them violations of syntax, violations of a procedure's
specification, violations of implementation restrictions, and
exceptional situations in the environment.  When an exceptional
situation is detected by the implementation, an @emph{exception is
raised}, which means that a special procedure called the @emph{current
exception handler} is called.  A program can also raise an exception,
and override the current exception handler; @ref{stdlib exceptions}.

When an exception is raised, an object is provided that describes the
nature of the exceptional situation.  The report uses the condition
system described in library section ``Conditions'' to describe
exceptional situations, classifying them by condition types.

Some exceptional situations allow continuing the program if the
exception handler takes appropriate action.  The corresponding
exceptions are called @emph{continuable}.  For most of the exceptional
situations described in this report, portable programs cannot rely upon
the exception being continuable at the place where the situation was
detected.  For those exceptions, the exception handler that is invoked
by the exception should not return.  In some cases, however, continuing
is permissible, and the handler may return.  @ref{stdlib exceptions}

Implementations must raise an exception when they are unable to continue
correct execution of a correct program due to some @emph{implementation
restriction}.  For example, an implementation that does not support
infinities must raise an exception with condition type
@code{&implementation-restriction} when it evaluates an expression whose
result would be an infinity.

Some possible implementation restrictions such as the lack of
representations for NaNs and infinities are anticipated by this report,
and implementations typically must raise an exception of the appropriate
condition type if they encounter such a situation.

This report uses the phrase ``an exception is raised'' synonymously with
``an exception must be raised''.  This report uses the phrase ``an
exception with condition type @var{t}'' to indicate that the object
provided with the exception is a condition object of the specified type.
The phrase ``a continuable exception is raised'' indicates an
exceptional situation that permits the exception handler to return.


@c page
@node lang basic argument checking
@subsection Argument checking


Many procedures specified in this report or as part of a standard
library restrict the arguments they accept.  Typically, a procedure
accepts only specific numbers and types of arguments.  Many syntactic
forms similarly restrict the values to which one or more of their
subforms can evaluate.  These restrictions imply responsibilities for
both the programmer and the implementation.  Specifically, the
programmer is responsible for ensuring that the values indeed adhere to
the restrictions described in the specification.  The implementation
must check that the restrictions in the specification are indeed met, to
the extent that it is reasonable, possible, and necessary to allow the
specified operation to complete successfully.

Note that it is not always possible for an implementation to completely
check the restrictions set forth in a specification.  For example, if an
operation is specified to accept a procedure with specific properties,
checking of these properties is undecidable in general.  Similarly, some
operations accept both lists and procedures that are called by these
operations.  Since lists can be mutated by the procedures through the
@rsixlibrary{mutable-pairs} library, an argument that is a list when the
operation starts may become a non--list during the execution of the
operation.

Also, the procedure might escape to a different continuation, preventing
the operation from performing more checks.  Requiring the operation to
check that the argument is a list after each call to such a procedure
would be impractical.  Furthermore, some operations that accept lists
only need to traverse these lists partially to perform their function;
requiring the implementation to traverse the remainder of the list to
verify that all specified restrictions have been met might violate
reasonable performance assumptions.  For these reasons, the programmer's
obligations may exceed the checking obligations of the implementation.

When an implementation detects a violation of a restriction for an
argument, it must raise an exception with condition type
@code{&assertion} in a way consistent with the safety of execution as
described in section ``Safety''.


@c page
@node lang basic syntax violations
@subsection Syntax violations


The subforms of a special form usually need to obey certain syntactic
restrictions.  As forms may be subject to macro expansion, which may not
terminate, the question of whether they obey the specified restrictions
is undecidable in general.

When macro expansion terminates, however, implementations must detect
violations of the syntax.  A @emph{syntax violation} is an error with
respect to the syntax of library bodies, top--level bodies, or the
``syntax'' entries in the specification of the base library or the
standard libraries.  Moreover, attempting to assign to an immutable
variable (i.e. the variables exported by a library) is also considered a
syntax violation.

If a top--level or library form in a program is not syntactically
correct, then the implementation must raise an exception with condition
type @code{&syntax}, and execution of that top--level program or library
must not be allowed to begin.


@c page
@node lang basic safety
@subsection Safety


The standard libraries whose exports are described by this document are
said to be @emph{safe libraries}.  Libraries and top--level programs
that import only from safe libraries are also said to be safe.

As defined by this document, the Scheme programming language is safe in
the following sense: The execution of a safe top--level program cannot
go so badly wrong as to crash or to continue to execute while behaving
in ways that are inconsistent with the semantics described in this
document, unless an exception is raised.

Violations of an implementation restriction must raise an exception with
condition type @code{&implementation-restriction}, as must all
violations and errors that would otherwise threaten system integrity in
ways that might result in execution that is inconsistent with the
semantics described in this document.

The above safety properties are guaranteed only for top--level programs
and libraries that are said to be safe.  In particular, implementations
may provide access to unsafe libraries in ways that cannot guarantee
safety.


@c page
@node lang basic boolean values
@subsection Boolean values


Although there is a separate boolean type, any Scheme value can be used
as a boolean value for the purpose of a conditional test.  In a
conditional test, all values count as true in such a test except for
@false{}.  This report uses the word ``true'' to refer to any Scheme
value except @false{}, and the word ``false'' to refer to @false{}.


@c page
@node lang basic multiple return values
@subsection Multiple return values


A Scheme expression can evaluate to an arbitrary finite number of
values.  These values are passed to the expression's continuation.

Not all continuations accept any number of values. For example, a
continuation that accepts the argument to a procedure call is guaranteed
to accept exactly one value.  The effect of passing some other number of
values to such a continuation is unspecified.  The
@func{call-with-values} procedure makes it possible to create
continuations that accept specified numbers of return values.  If the
number of return values passed to a continuation created by a call to
@func{call-with-values} is not accepted by its consumer that was passed
in that call, then an exception is raised.  A more complete description
of the number of values accepted by different continuations and the
consequences of passing an unexpected number of values is given in the
description of the @func{values} procedure.

A number of forms in the base library have sequences of expressions as
subforms that are evaluated sequentially, with the return values of all
but the last expression being discarded.  The continuations discarding
these values accept any number of values.


@c page
@node lang basic unspecified behavior
@subsection Unspecified behavior


If an expression is said to ``return unspecified values'', then the
expression must evaluate without raising an exception, but the values
returned depend on the implementation; this report explicitly does not
say how many or what values should be returned.  Programmers should not
rely on a specific number of return values or the specific values
themselves.


@c page
@node lang basic storage model
@subsection Storage model


Variables and objects such as pairs, vectors, bytevectors, strings,
hashtables, and records implicitly refer to locations or sequences of
locations.  A string, for example, contains as many locations as there
are characters in the string.  (These locations need not correspond to a
full machine word.) A new value may be stored into one of these
locations using the @func{string-set!} procedure, but the string
contains the same locations as before.

An object fetched from a location, by a variable reference or by a
procedure such as @func{car}, @func{vector-ref}, or @func{string-ref},
is equivalent in the sense of @func{eqv?} to the object last stored in
the location before the fetch.

Every location is marked to show whether it is in use.  No variable or
object ever refers to a location that is not in use.  Whenever this
report speaks of storage being allocated for a variable or object, what
is meant is that an appropriate number of locations are chosen from the
set of locations that are not in use, and the chosen locations are
marked to indicate that they are now in use before the variable or
object is made to refer to them.

It is desirable for constants (i.e. the values of literal expressions)
to reside in read-only memory.  To express this, it is convenient to
imagine that every object that refers to locations is associated with a
flag telling whether that object is mutable.  Literal constants, the
strings returned by @func{symbol->string}, records with no mutable
fields, and other values explicitly designated as immutable are
immutable objects, while all objects created by the other procedures
listed in this report are mutable.  An attempt to store a new value into
a location referred to by an immutable object should raise an exception
with condition type @code{&assertion}.


@c page
@node lang basic proper tail recursion
@subsection Proper tail recursion


Implementations of Scheme must be @emph{properly tail--recursive}.
Procedure calls that occur in certain syntactic contexts called
@emph{tail contexts} are @emph{tail calls}.

A Scheme implementation is properly tail--recursive if it supports an
unbounded number of active tail calls.  A call is @emph{active} if the
called procedure may still return.  Note that this includes regular
returns as well as returns through continuations captured earlier by
@func{call-with-current-continuation} that are later invoked.  In the
absence of captured continuations, calls could return at most once and
the active calls would be those that had not yet returned.  A formal
definition of proper tail recursion can be found in Clinger's paper
``Proper tail recursion and and space efficiency''.  The rules for
identifying tail calls in constructs from the @rsixlibrary{base} library
are described in section ``Tail calls and tail contexts''.


@c page
@node lang basic dynamic extent
@subsection Dynamic extent and the dynamic environment


@cindex Dynamic extent, definition of
@cindex Definition of dynamic extent

@cindex Dynamic environment, definition of
@cindex Definition of dynamic environment


For a procedure call, the time between when it is initiated and when it
returns is called its @emph{dynamic extent}.  In Scheme,
@func{call-with-current-continuation} allows reentering a dynamic extent
after its procedure call has returned.  Thus, the dynamic extent of a
call may not be a single, connected time period.

Some operations described in the report acquire information in addition
to their explicit arguments from the @emph{dynamic environment}.  For
example, @func{call-with-current-continuation} accesses an implicit
context established by @func{dynamic-wind}, and the @func{raise}
procedure accesses the current exception handler.

The operations that modify the dynamic environment do so dynamically,
for the dynamic extent of a call to a procedure like @func{dynamic-wind}
or @func{with-exception-handler}.  When such a call returns, the
previous dynamic environment is restored.  The dynamic environment can
be thought of as part of the dynamic extent of a call.  Consequently, it
is captured by @func{call-with-current-continuation}, and restored by
invoking the escape procedure it creates.



@c page
@node lang entry
@section Entry format

@ignore
In the original document, this chapter was the "entry.tex" file.
@end ignore

The chapters that describe bindings in the base library and the standard
libraries are organized into entries.  Each entry describes one language
feature or a group of related features, where a feature is either a
syntactic construct or a built--in procedure.  An entry begins with one
or more header lines of the form

@deffn Category template
@dots{}
@end deffn

The @emph{Category} defines the kind of binding described by the entry,
typically either ``Syntax'' or ``Procedure''.  An entry may specify
various restrictions on subforms or arguments.


@menu
* lang entry syntax::                Syntax entries.
* lang entry procedure::             Procedure entries.
* lang entry implementation resp::   Implementation responsibilities.
* lang entry other kinds::           Other kinds of entries.
* lang entry equivalent::            Equivalent entries.
* lang entry evaluation examples::   Evaluation examples.
* lang entry naming conventions::    Naming conventions.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang entry syntax
@subsection Syntax entries


If @emph{category} is ``Syntax'', the entry describes a special
syntactic construct, and the template gives the syntax of the forms of
the construct.  The template is written in a notation similar to a
right--hand side of the @acronym{BNF} rules in chapter ``Lexical syntax
and datum syntax'', and describes the set of forms equivalent to the
forms matching the template as syntactic data.  Some ``Syntax'' entries
carry a suffix (@code{expand}), specifying that the syntactic keyword of
the construct is exported with level 1.  Otherwise, the syntactic
keyword is exported with level 0; @ref{lang library import export}.

Components of the form described by a template are designated by
syntactic variables, which are written using angle brackets, for
example, @meta{expression}, @meta{variable}.  Case is insignificant in
syntactic variables.  Syntactic variables stand for other forms, or
sequences of them.  A syntactic variable may refer to a non--terminal in
the grammar for syntactic data, in which case only forms matching that
non--terminal are permissible in that position.  For example,
@meta{identifier} stands for a form which must be an identifier.  Also,
@meta{expression} stands for any form which is a syntactically valid
expression.  Other non--terminals that are used in templates are defined
as part of the specification.

The notation

@example
@hyperi{thing} ...
@end example

@noindent
indicates zero or more occurrences of a @meta{thing}, and

@example
@hyperi{thing} @hyperii{thing} ...
@end example

@noindent
indicates one or more occurrences of a @meta{thing}.

It is the programmer's responsibility to ensure that each component of a
form has the shape specified by a template.  Descriptions of syntax may
express other restrictions on the components of a form.  Typically, such
a restriction is formulated as a phrase of the form ``@meta{x} must be a
@dots{}''.  Again, these specify the programmer's responsibility.  It is
the implementation's responsibility to check that these restrictions are
satisfied, as long as the macro transformers involved in expanding the
form terminate.  If the implementation detects that a component does not
meet the restriction, an exception with condition type @code{&syntax}
is raised.


@c page
@node lang entry procedure
@subsection Procedure entries


If @emph{Category} is ``Procedure'', then the entry describes a
procedure, and the header line gives a template for a call to the
procedure.  Parameter names in the template are shown like this:
@var{parm}.  Thus the header line:

@deffn Procedure vector-ref @var{vector} @var{k}
@dots{}
@end deffn


@noindent
indicates that the built--in procedure @func{vector-ref} takes two
arguments, a vector @var{vector} and an exact non--negative integer
object @var{k} (see below).  The header lines:

@deffn Procedure procname @var{k}
@dots{}
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure procname @var{k} @var{fill}
@dots{}
@end deffn

@noindent
indicate that the @func{make-vector} procedure takes either one or two
arguments.  The parameter names are case--insensitive.

As with syntax templates, an ellipsis @dots{} at the end of a header
line, as in:

@deffn Procedure the-proc @vari{z} @varii{z} @variii{z} ...
@dots{}
@end deffn

@noindent
indicates that the procedure takes arbitrarily many arguments of the
same type as specified for the last parameter name.  In this case,
@code{=} accepts two or more arguments that must all be complex number
objects.

A procedure that detects an argument that it is not specified to handle
must raise an exception with condition type @code{&assertion}.  Also,
the argument specifications are exhaustive: if the number of arguments
provided in a procedure call does not match any number of arguments
accepted by the procedure, an exception with condition type
@code{&assertion} must be raised.

For succinctness, the report follows the convention that if a parameter
name is also the name of a type, then the corresponding argument must be
of the named type.  For example, the header line for @func{vector-ref}
given above dictates that the first argument to @func{vector-ref} must
be a vector.  The following naming conventions imply type restrictions:

@table @var
@item obj
any object;

@item z
complex number object;

@item x
real number object;

@item y
real number object;

@item q
rational number object;

@item n
integer object;

@item k
exact non--negative integer object;

@item bool
boolean (@false{} or @true{});

@item octet
exact integer object in @{0, @dots{}, 255@};

@item byte
exact integer object in @{-128, @dots{}, 127@};

@item char
character;

@item pair
pair;

@item vector
vector;

@item string
string;

@item condition
condition;

@item bytevector
bytevector;

@item proc
procedure.
@end table

Other type restrictions are expressed through parameter--naming
conventions that are described in specific chapters.  For example,
library chapter ``Arithmetic'' uses a number of special parameter
variables for the various subsets of the numbers.

With the listed type restrictions, it is the programmer's responsibility
to ensure that the corresponding argument is of the specified type.  It
is the implementation's responsibility to check for that type.

A parameter called @var{list} means that it is the programmer's
responsibility to pass an argument that is a list.  It is the
implementation's responsibility to check that the argument is
appropriately structured for the operation to perform its function, to
the extent that this is possible and reasonable.  The implementation
must at least check that the argument is either an empty list or a pair.

Descriptions of procedures may express other restrictions on the
arguments of a procedure.  Typically, such a restriction is formulated
as a phrase of the form ``@var{x} must be a @dots{}'' (or otherwise
using the word ``must'').


@c page
@node lang entry implementation resp
@subsection Implementation responsibilities


In addition to the restrictions implied by naming conventions, an entry
may list additional explicit restrictions.  These explicit restrictions
usually describe both the programmer's responsibilities, who must ensure
that the subforms of a form are appropriate, or that an appropriate
argument is passed, and the implementation's responsibilities, which
must check that subform adheres to the specified restrictions (if macro
expansion terminates), or if the argument is appropriate.

A description may explicitly list the implementation's responsibilities
for some arguments or subforms in a paragraph labeled ``Implementation
responsibilities''.  In this case, the responsibilities specified for
these subforms or arguments in the rest of the description are only for
the programmer.  A paragraph describing implementation responsibility
does not affect the implementation's responsibilities for checking
subforms or arguments not mentioned in the paragraph.


@c page
@node lang entry other kinds
@subsection Other kinds of entries


If @emph{Category} is something other than ``Syntax'' and ``Procedure'',
then the entry describes a non--procedural value, and the
@emph{category} describes the type of that value.  The header line:

@deffn {Condition Type} {&who}
@dots{}
@end deffn

@noindent
indicates that @code{&who} is a condition type.  The header line:

@deffn {Auxiliary Syntax} unquote
@dots{}
@end deffn

@noindent
indicates that @func{unquote} is a syntax binding that may occur only as
part of specific surrounding expressions.  Any use as an independent
syntactic construct or identifier is a syntax violation.  As with
``Syntax'' entries, some ``Auxiliary Syntax'' entries carry a suffix
(@code{expand}), specifying that the syntactic keyword of the construct
is exported with level 1.


@c page
@node lang entry equivalent
@subsection Equivalent entries


The description of an entry occasionally states that it is @emph{the
same} as another entry.  This means that both entries are equivalent.
Specifically, it means that if both entries have the same name and are
thus exported from different libraries, the entries from both libraries
can be imported under the same name without conflict.


@c page
@node lang entry evaluation examples
@subsection Evaluation examples


The symbol @code{@result{}} used in program examples can be read
``evaluates to''.  For example:

@example
(* 5 8)
@result{} 40
@end example

@noindent
means that the expression @code{(* 5 8)} evaluates to the object
@code{40}.  Or, more precisely: the expression given by the sequence of
characters @code{(* 5 8)} evaluates, in an environment that imports the
relevant library, to an object that may be represented externally by the
sequence of characters @code{40}.

The @code{@result{}} symbol is also used when the evaluation of an
expression causes a violation.  For example:

@example
(integer->char #xD800)
@result{} &assertion exception
@end example

@noindent
means that the evaluation of the expression @code{(integer->char
#xD800)} must raise an exception with condition type @code{&assertion}.

Moreover, the @code{@result{}} symbol is also used to explicitly say
that the value of an expression in unspecified.  For example:

@example
(eqv? "" "")
@result{} unspecified
@end example

Mostly, examples merely illustrate the behavior specified in the entry.
In some cases, however, they disambiguate otherwise ambiguous
specifications and are thus normative.  Note that, in some cases,
specifically in the case of inexact number objects, the return value is
only specified conditionally or approximately.  For example:

@example
(atan -inf.0)
@result{} -1.5707963267948965 ; approximately
@end example


@c page
@node lang entry naming conventions
@subsection Naming conventions


By convention, the names of procedures that store values into previously
allocated locations usually end in @code{!}.

By convention, @code{->} appears within the names of procedures that
take an object of one type and return an analogous object of another
type.  For example, @func{list->vector} takes a list and returns a
vector whose elements are the same as those of the list.

By convention, the names of predicates (procedures that always return a
boolean value) end in @code{?} when the name contains any letters;
otherwise, the predicate's name does not end with a question mark.

By convention, the components of compound names are separated by
@code{-}.  In particular, prefixes that are actual words or can be
pronounced as though they were actual words are followed by a hyphen,
except when the first character following the hyphen would be something
other than a letter, in which case the hyphen is omitted.  Short,
unpronounceable prefixes (@code{fx} and @code{fl}) are not followed by a
hyphen.

By convention, the names of condition types start with @code{&}.


@c page
@node lang library
@section Libraries


@ignore
In the original document this chapter was the "library.tex" file.
@end ignore

Libraries are parts of a program that can be distributed independently.
The library system supports macro definitions within libraries, macro
exports, and distinguishes the phases in which definitions and imports
are needed.  This chapter defines the notation for libraries and a
semantics for library expansion and execution.

@menu
* lang library form::           Library form.
* lang library import export::  Import and export levels.
* lang library examples::       Examples.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang library form
@subsection Library form


@findex library
@cindex library form, the
@cindex The library form


A library definition must have the following form:

@example
(library @meta{library name}
  (export @meta{export spec} @dots{})
  (import @meta{import spec} @dots{})
  @meta{library body})
@end example

It is a syntax violation if a constraint given in this section is not
met.


@menu
* lang library form decl::      Library declaration.
* lang library form names::     Library names.
* lang library form export::    The export specification.
* lang library form import::    The import specification.
* lang library form version::   The version reference.
* lang library form conflicts:: Handling conflicts.
* lang library form body::      Library bodies.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang library form decl
@subsubsection Library declaration


A library declaration contains the following elements:

@itemize
@item
The @meta{library name} specifies the name of the library (possibly with
version).

@item
The @func{export} subform specifies a list of exports, which names a
subset of the bindings defined within or imported into the library.

@item
The @func{import} subform specifies the imported bindings as a list of
import dependencies, where each dependency specifies:

@itemize -
@item
the imported library's name, and, optionally, constraints on its
version,

@item
the relevant levels, e.g. expand or run time,

@item
the subset of the library's exports to make available within the
importing library, and the local names to use within the importing
library for each of the library's exports.
@end itemize

@item
The @meta{library body} is the library body, consisting of a sequence of
definitions followed by a sequence of expressions.  The definitions may
be both for local (unexported) and exported bindings, and the
expressions are initialization expressions to be evaluated for their
effects.
@end itemize

An identifier can be imported with the same local name from two or more
libraries or for two levels from the same library only if the binding
exported by each library is the same (i.e., the binding is defined in
one library, and it arrives through the imports only by exporting and
re--exporting).  Otherwise, no identifier can be imported multiple
times, defined multiple times, or both defined and imported.  No
identifiers are visible within a library except for those explicitly
imported into the library or defined within the library.


@c page
@node lang library form names
@subsubsection Library names


A @meta{library name} uniquely identifies a library within an
implementation, and is globally visible in the @func{import} clauses of
all other libraries within an implementation.  A @meta{library name} has
the following form:

@example
(@hyperi{identifier} @hyperii{identifier} @dots{} @meta{version})
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{version} is empty or has the following form:

@example
(@meta{sub-version} @dots{})
@end example

Each @meta{sub-version} must represent an exact nonnegative integer
object.  An empty @meta{version} is equivalent to @code{()}.


@c page
@node lang library form export
@subsubsection The export specification


An @meta{export spec} names a set of imported and locally defined
bindings to be exported, possibly with different external names.  An
@meta{export spec} must have one of the following forms:

@example
@meta{identifier}
(rename (@hyperi{identifier} @hyperii{identifier})
        @dots{})
@end example

In an @meta{export spec}, an @meta{identifier} names a single binding
defined within or imported into the library, where the external name for
the export is the same as the name of the binding within the library.  A
@func{rename} spec exports the binding named by @hyperi{identifier} in
each @code{(@hyperi{identifier} @hyperii{identifier})} pairing, using
@hyperii{identifier} as the external name.


@c page
@node lang library form import
@subsubsection The import specification


Each @meta{import spec} specifies a set of bindings to be imported into
the library, the levels at which they are to be available, and the local
names by which they are to be known.  An @meta{import spec} must be one
of the following:

@example
@meta{import set}
(for @meta{import set} @meta{import level} @dots{})
@end example

An @meta{import level} is one of the following:

@example
run
expand
(meta @meta{level})
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{level} represents an exact integer object.

As an @meta{import level}, @func{run} is an abbreviation for @code{(meta
0)}, and @func{expand} is an abbreviation for @code{(meta 1)}.

An @meta{import set} names a set of bindings from another library and
possibly specifies local names for the imported bindings.  It must be
one of the following:

@example
@meta{library reference}
(library @meta{library reference})
(only @meta{import set} @meta{identifier} ...)
(except @meta{import set} @meta{identifier} ...)
(prefix @meta{import set} @meta{identifier})
(rename @meta{import set} (@hyperi{identifier} @hyperii{identifier}) ...)
@end example

A @meta{library reference} identifies a library by its name and
optionally by its version.  It has one of the following forms:

@example
(@hyperi{identifier} @hyperii{identifier} ...)
(@hyperi{identifier} @hyperii{identifier} ... @meta{version reference})
@end example

A @meta{library reference} whose first @meta{identifier} is @func{for},
@func{library}, @func{only}, @func{except}, @func{prefix}, or
@func{rename} is permitted only within a @func{library} @meta{import
set}.  The @meta{import set} @code{(library @meta{library reference})}
is otherwise equivalent to @meta{library reference}.

A @meta{library reference} with no @meta{version reference} (first form
above) is equivalent to a @meta{library reference} with a @meta{version
reference} of @code{()}.


@c page
@node lang library form version
@subsubsection The version reference


A @meta{version reference} specifies a set of @meta{version}s that it
matches.  The @meta{library reference} identifies all libraries of the
same name and whose version is matched by the @meta{version reference}.
A @meta{version reference} has the following form:

@example
(@hyperi{sub-version reference} ... @hypern{sub-version reference})
(and @meta{version reference} ...)
(or @meta{version reference} @dots{})
(not @meta{version reference})
@end example

A @meta{version reference} of the first form matches a @meta{version}
with at least @var{n} elements, whose @meta{sub-version reference}s
match the corresponding @meta{sub-version}s.  An @func{and}
@hyper{version reference} matches a version if all @meta{version
references} following the @func{and} match it.  Correspondingly, an
@func{or} @meta{version reference} matches a version if one of
@meta{version references} following the @func{or} matches it, and a
@func{not} @meta{version reference} matches a version if the
@meta{version reference} following it does not match it.

A @meta{sub-version reference} has one of the following forms:

@example
@meta{sub-version}
(>= @meta{sub-version})
(<= @meta{sub-version})
(and @meta{sub-version reference} @dots{})
(or @meta{sub-version reference} @dots{})
(not @meta{sub-version reference})
@end example

A @meta{sub-version reference} of the first form matches a
@meta{sub-version} if it is equal to it.  A @code{>=} @meta{sub-version
reference} of the first form matches a sub--version if it is greater or
equal to the @meta{sub-version} following it; analogously for @code{<=}.
An @func{and} @meta{sub-version reference} matches a sub--version if all
of the subsequent @hyper{sub-version reference}s match it.

Correspondingly, an @func{or} @meta{sub-version reference} matches a
sub--version if one of the subsequent @meta{sub-version reference}s
matches it, and a @func{not} @meta{sub-version reference} matches a
sub--version if the subsequent @meta{sub-version reference} does not
match it.

Examples:

@multitable {abcdefghilmnopqrstuvz} {abcdefghi} {match?}
@headitem version reference @tab version @tab match?
@item @code{()} @tab @code{(1)} @tab yes
@item @code{(1)} @tab @code{(1)} @tab yes
@item @code{(1)} @tab @code{(2)} @tab no
@item @code{(2 3)} @tab @code{(2)} @tab no
@item @code{(2 3)} @tab @code{(2 3)} @tab yes
@item @code{(2 3)} @tab @code{(2 3 5)} @tab yes
@item @code{(or (1 (>= 1)) (2))} @tab @code{(2)} @tab yes
@item @code{(or (1 (>= 1)) (2))} @tab @code{(1 1)} @tab yes
@item @code{(or (1 (>= 1)) (2))} @tab @code{(1 0)} @tab no
@item @code{((or 1 2 3))} @tab @code{(1)} @tab yes
@item @code{((or 1 2 3))} @tab @code{(2)} @tab yes
@item @code{((or 1 2 3))} @tab @code{(3)} @tab yes
@item @code{((or 1 2 3))} @tab @code{(4)} @tab no
@end multitable


@c page
@node lang library form conflicts
@subsubsection Handling conflicts


When more than one library is identified by a library reference, the
choice of libraries is determined in some implementation--dependent
manner.

To avoid problems such as incompatible types and replicated state,
implementations should prohibit the two libraries whose library names
consist of the same sequence of identifiers but whose versions do not
match to co--exist in the same program.

By default, all of an imported library's exported bindings are made
visible within an importing library using the names given to the
bindings by the imported library.  The precise set of bindings to be
imported and the names of those bindings can be adjusted with the
@func{only}, @func{except}, @func{prefix}, and @func{rename} forms as
described below.

@table @func
@item only
Produces a subset of the bindings from another @meta{import set},
including only the listed @meta{identifier}s.  The included
@meta{identifier}s must be in the original @meta{import set}.

@item except
Produces a subset of the bindings from another @meta{import set},
including all but the listed @meta{identifier}s.  All of the excluded
@meta{identifier}s must be in the original @meta{import set}.

@item prefix
Adds the @meta{identifier} prefix to each name from another @meta{import
set}.

@item rename
Used as:

@example
(rename (@hyperi{identifier} @hyperii{identifier})
        @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
removes the bindings for @code{@hyperi{identifier} @dots{}} to form an
intermediate @meta{import set}, then adds the bindings back for the
corresponding @code{@hyperii{identifier} @dots{}} to form the final
@meta{import set}.  Each @hyperi{identifier} must be in the original
@meta{import set}, each @hyperii{identifier} must not be in the
intermediate @meta{import set}, and the @hyperii{identifier}s must be
distinct.
@end table


@c page
@node lang library form body
@subsubsection Library bodies


The @meta{library body} of a @func{library} form consists of forms that
are classified as @emph{definitions} or @emph{expressions}.  Which forms
belong to which class depends on the imported libraries and the result
of expansion.  Generally, forms that are not definitions are
expressions.

A @meta{library body} is like a @meta{body} except that a @meta{library
body}s need not include any expressions.  It must have the following
form:

@example
@meta{definition} @dots{} @meta{expression} @dots{}
@end example

When @func{begin}, @func{let-syntax}, or @func{letrec-syntax} forms
occur in a top--level body prior to the first expression, they are
spliced into the body.  Some or all of the body, including portions
wrapped in @func{begin}, @func{let-syntax}, or @func{letrec-syntax}
forms, may be specified by a syntactic abstraction.

The transformer expressions and bindings are evaluated and created from
left to right, as described in @ref{lang expansion,Expansion process}
The expressions of variable definitions are evaluated from left to
right, as if in an implicit @func{letrec*}, and the body expressions are
also evaluated from left to right after the expressions of the variable
definitions.  A fresh location is created for each exported variable and
initialized to the value of its local counterpart.  The effect of
returning twice to the continuation of the last body expression is
unspecified.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The names @func{library}, @func{export}, @func{import},
@func{for}, @func{run}, @func{expand}, @func{meta}, @func{import},
@func{export}, @func{only}, @func{except}, @func{prefix}, @func{rename},
@func{and}, @func{or}, @func{not}, @func{>=}, and @func{<=} appearing in
the library syntax are part of the syntax and are not reserved, i.e.,
the same names can be used for other purposes within the library or even
exported from or imported into a library with different meanings,
without affecting their use in the @func{library} form.
@end quotation

Bindings defined with a library are not visible in code outside of the
library, unless the bindings are explicitly exported from the library.
An exported macro may, however, @emph{implicitly export} an otherwise
unexported identifier defined within or imported into the library.  That
is, it may insert a reference to that identifier into the output code it
produces.

All explicitly exported variables are immutable in both the exporting
and importing libraries.  It is thus a syntax violation if an explicitly
exported variable appears on the left--hand side of a @func{set!}
expression, either in the exporting or importing libraries.

All implicitly exported variables are also immutable in both the
exporting and importing libraries.  It is thus a syntax violation if a
variable appears on the left--hand side of a @func{set!}  expression in
any code produced by an exported macro outside of the library in which
the variable is defined.  It is also a syntax violation if a reference
to an assigned variable appears in any code produced by an exported
macro outside of the library in which the variable is defined, where an
assigned variable is one that appears on the left--hand side of a
@func{set!} expression in the exporting library.

All other variables defined within a library are mutable.


@c page
@node lang library import export
@subsection Import and export levels


Expanding a library may require run--time information from another
library.  For example, if a macro transformer calls a procedure from
library @math{A}, then the library @math{A} must be instantiated before
expanding any use of the macro in library @math{B}.  Library @math{A}
may not be needed when library @math{B} is eventually run as part of a
program, or it may be needed for run time of library @math{B}, too.  The
library mechanism distinguishes these times by phases, which are
explained in this section.

Every library can be characterized by expand--time information
(minimally, its imported libraries, a list of the exported keywords, a
list of the exported variables, and code to evaluate the transformer
expressions) and run--time information (minimally, code to evaluate the
variable definition right--hand--side expressions, and code to evaluate
the body expressions).  The expand--time information must be available
to expand references to any exported binding, and the run--time
information must be available to evaluate references to any exported
variable binding.

A @emph{phase} is a time at which the expressions within a library are
evaluated.  Within a library body, top--level expressions and the
right--hand sides of @func{define} forms are evaluated at run time,
i.e. phase @math{0}, and the right--hand sides of @func{define-syntax}
forms are evaluated at expand time, i.e. phase @math{1}.  When
@func{define-syntax}, @func{let-syntax}, or @func{letrec-syntax} forms
appear within code evaluated at phase @math{n}, the right--hand sides
are evaluated at phase @math{n+1}.

These phases are relative to the phase in which the library itself is
used.  An @emph{instance} of a library corresponds to an evaluation of
its variable definitions and expressions in a particular phase relative
to another library---a process called @emph{instantiation}.  For
example, if a top--level expression in a library @math{B} refers to a
variable export from another library @math{A}, then it refers to the
export from an instance of @math{A} at phase @math{0} (relative to the
phase of @math{B}).  But if a phase @math{1} expression within @math{B}
refers to the same binding from @math{A}, then it refers to the export
from an instance of @math{A} at phase @math{1} (relative to the phase of
@math{B}).

A @emph{visit} of a library corresponds to the evaluation of its syntax
definitions in a particular phase relative to another library; a process
called @emph{visiting}.  For example, if a top--level expression in a
library @math{B} refers to a macro export from another library @math{A},
then it refers to the export from a visit of @math{A} at phase @math{0}
(relative to the phase of @math{B}), which corresponds to the evaluation
of the macro's transformer expression at phase @math{1}.

A @emph{level} is a lexical property of an identifier that determines in
which phases it can be referenced.  The level for each identifier bound
by a definition within a library is @math{0}; that is, the identifier
can be referenced only at phase @math{0} within the library.  The level
for each imported binding is determined by the enclosing @func{for} form
of the @func{import} in the importing library, in addition to the levels
of the identifier in the exporting library.  Import and export levels
are combined by pairwise addition of all level combinations.  For
example, references to an imported identifier exported for levels
@math{p_a} and @math{p_b} and imported for levels @math{q_a},
@math{q_b}, and @math{q_c} are valid at levels @math{p_a + q_a},
@math{p_a + q_b}, @math{p_a + q_c}, @math{p_b + q_a}, @math{p_b + q_b},
and @math{p_b + q_c}.  An @meta{import set} without an enclosing
@func{for} is equivalent to @code{(for @meta{import set} run)}, which is
the same as @code{(for @meta{import set} (meta 0))}.

The export level of an exported binding is @math{0} for all bindings
that are defined within the exporting library.  The export levels of a
reexported binding, i.e. an export imported from another library, are
the same as the effective import levels of that binding within the
reexporting library.

For the libraries defined in the library report, the export level is
@math{0} for nearly all bindings.  The exceptions are
@func{syntax-rules}, @func{identifier-syntax}, @code{...}, and @code{_}
from the @rsixlibrary{base} library, which are exported with level
@math{1}, @func{set!} from the @rsixlibrary{base} library, which is
exported with levels @math{0} and @math{1}, and all bindings from the
composite @code{(rnrs (6))} library, which are exported with levels
@math{0} and @math{1}.

Macro expansion within a library can introduce a reference to an
identifier that is not explicitly imported into the library.  In that
case, the phase of the reference must match the identifier's level as
shifted by the difference between the phase of the source library (i.e.,
the library that supplied the identifier's lexical context) and the
library that encloses the reference.  For example, suppose that
expanding a library invokes a macro transformer, and the evaluation of
the macro transformer refers to an identifier that is exported from
another library (so the phase @math{1} instance of the library is used);
suppose further that the value of the binding is a syntax object
representing an identifier with only a level @math{n} binding; then, the
identifier must be used only at phase @math{n+1} in the library being
expanded.  This combination of levels and phases is why negative levels
on identifiers can be useful, even though libraries exist only at
non--negative phases.

If any of a library's definitions are referenced at phase @math{0} in
the expanded form of a program, then an instance of the referenced
library is created for phase @math{0} before the program's definitions
and expressions are evaluated.  This rule applies transitively: if the
expanded form of one library references at phase @math{0} an identifier
from another library, then before the referencing library is
instantiated at phase @math{n}, the referenced library must be
instantiated at phase @math{n}.  When an identifier is referenced at any
phase @math{n} greater than @math{0}, in contrast, then the defining
library is instantiated at phase @math{n} at some unspecified time
before the reference is evaluated.  Similarly, when a macro keyword is
referenced at phase @math{n} during the expansion of a library, then the
defining library is visited at phase @math{n} at some unspecified time
before the reference is evaluated.

An implementation may distinguish instances/visits of a library for
different phases or to use an instance/visit at any phase as an
instance/visit at any other phase.  An implementation may further expand
each @code{library} form with distinct visits of libraries in any phase
and/or instances of libraries in phases above @math{0}.  An
implementation may create instances/visits of more libraries at more
phases than required to satisfy references.  When an identifier appears
as an expression in a phase that is inconsistent with the identifier's
level, then an implementation may raise an exception either at expand
time or run time, or it may allow the reference.  Thus, a library whose
meaning depends on whether the instances of a library are distinguished
or shared across phases or @func{library} expansions may be unportable.


@c page
@node lang library examples
@subsection Examples


Examples for various @meta{import spec}s and @meta{export spec}s:

@example
(library (stack)
  (export make push! pop! empty!)
  (import (rnrs)
          (rnrs mutable-pairs))

  (define (make)
    (list '()))
  (define (push! s v)
    (set-car! s (cons v (car s))))
  (define (pop! s)
    (let ([v (caar s)])
      (set-car! s (cdar s))
      v))
  (define (empty! s)
    (set-car! s '())))

(library (balloons)
  (export make push pop)
  (import (rnrs))

  (define (make w h)
    (cons w h))
  (define (push b amt)
    (cons (- (car b) amt)
          (+ (cdr b) amt)))
  (define (pop b)
    (display "Boom! ")
    (display (* (car b) (cdr b)))
    (newline)))

(library (party)
  ;; Total exports:
  ;; make, push, push!, make-party, pop!
  (export (rename (balloon:make make)
                  (balloon:push push))
          push!
          make-party
          (rename (party-pop! pop!)))
  (import (rnrs)
          (only (stack) make push! pop!) ; not empty!
          (prefix (balloons) balloon:))

  ;; Creates a party as a stack of balloons,
  ;; starting with two balloons
  (define (make-party)
    (let ([s (make)]) ; from stack
      (push! s (balloon:make 10 10))
      (push! s (balloon:make 12 9))
      s))
  (define (party-pop! p)
    (balloon:pop (pop! p))))


(library (main)
  (export)
  (import (rnrs) (party))

  (define p (make-party))
  (pop! p)        ; displays "Boom! 108"
  (push! p (push (make 5 5) 1))
  (pop! p))       ; displays "Boom! 24"
@end example

Examples for macros and phases:

@example
(library (my-helpers id-stuff)
  (export find-dup)
  (import (rnrs))

  (define (find-dup l)
    (and (pair? l)
         (let loop ((rest (cdr l)))
           (cond
            [(null? rest) (find-dup (cdr l))]
            [(bound-identifier=? (car l) (car rest))
             (car rest)]
            [else (loop (cdr rest))])))))

(library (my-helpers values-stuff)
  (export mvlet)
  (import (rnrs) (for (my-helpers id-stuff) expand))

  (define-syntax mvlet
    (lambda (stx)
      (syntax-case stx ()
        [(_ [(id ...) expr] body0 body ...)
         (not (find-dup (syntax (id ...))))
         (syntax
           (call-with-values
               (lambda () expr)
             (lambda (id ...) body0 body ...)))]))))

(library (let-div)
  (export let-div)
  (import (rnrs)
          (my-helpers values-stuff)
          (rnrs r5rs))

  (define (quotient+remainder n d)
    (let ([q (quotient n d)])
      (values q (- n (* q d)))))
  (define-syntax let-div
    (syntax-rules ()
      [(_ n d (q r) body0 body ...)
       (mvlet [(q r) (quotient+remainder n d)]
         body0 body ...)])))
@end example


@c page
@node lang programs
@section Top--level programs


@ignore
In the original document this chapter is the "programs.tex" file.
@end ignore

A ``top--level program'' specifies an entry point for defining and
running a Scheme program.  A top--level program specifies a set of
libraries to import and code to run.  Through the imported libraries,
whether directly or through the transitive closure of importing, a
top--level program defines a complete Scheme program.


@menu
* lang programs syntax::        Top-level program syntax.
* lang programs semantics::     Top-level program semantics.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang programs syntax
@subsection Top--level program syntax


A top--level program is a delimited piece of text, typically a file,
that has the following form:

@example
@meta{import form} @hyper{top-level body}
@end example

An @meta{import form} has the following form:

@example
(import @meta{import spec} @dots{})
@end example

A @meta{top-level body} has the following form:

@example
@meta{top-level body form} @dots{}
@end example

A @meta{top-level body form} is either a @hyper{definition} or an
@meta{expression}.

The @meta{import form} is identical to the import clause in libraries,
and specifies a set of libraries to import.  A @meta{top-level body} is
like a @meta{library body}, except that definitions and expressions may
occur in any order.  Thus, the syntax specified by @meta{top-level body
form} refers to the result of macro expansion.

When uses of @func{begin}, @func{let-syntax}, or @func{letrec-syntax}
from the @rsixlibrary{base} library occur in a top--level body prior to
the first expression, they are spliced into the body.  Some or all of
the body, including portions wrapped in @func{begin}, @func{let-syntax},
or @func{letrec-syntax} forms, may be specified by a syntactic
abstraction.


@c page
@node lang programs semantics
@subsection Top--level program semantics


A top--level program is executed by treating the program similarly to a
library, and evaluating its definitions and expressions.  The semantics
of a top--level body may be roughly explained by a simple translation
into a library body: Each @meta{expression} that appears before a
definition in the top-level body is converted into a dummy definition

@example
(define @meta{variable}
  (begin @meta{expression} @meta{unspecified}))
@end example

where @meta{variable} is a fresh identifier and @meta{unspecified} is a
side--effect--free expression returning an unspecified value.  (It is
generally impossible to determine which forms are definitions and
expressions without concurrently expanding the body, so the actual
translation is somewhat more complicated.)

On platforms that support it, a top--level program may access its
command line by calling the @func{command-line} procedure, @ref{stdlib
programlib,Command line access and exit values}


@c page
@node lang syntax
@section Primitive syntax


@ignore
In the original document this chapter is the "syntax.tex" file.
@end ignore

After the @func{import} form within a @func{library} form or a
top--level program, the forms that constitute the body of the library or
the top--level program depend on the libraries that are imported.  In
particular, imported syntactic keywords determine the available
syntactic abstractions and whether each form is a definition or
expression.  A few form types are always available independent of
imported libraries, however, including constant literals, variable
references, procedure calls, and macro uses.

@menu
* lang syntax primitive::       Primitive expression types.
* lang syntax macros::          Macros.
@end menu


@c page
@node lang syntax primitive
@subsection Primitive expression types


The entries in this section all describe expressions, which may occur in
the place of @meta{expression} syntactic variables.


@subsubheading Constant literals

@deffn Syntax @meta{number}
@deffnx Syntax @meta{boolean}
@deffnx Syntax @meta{character}
@deffnx Syntax @meta{string}
@deffnx Syntax @meta{bytevector}
An expression consisting of a representation of a number object, a
boolean, a character, a string, or a bytevector, evaluates ``to
itself''.

@example
145932          @result{}  145932
#t              @result{}  #t
"abc"           @result{}  "abc"
#vu8(2 24 123)  @result{} #vu8(2 24 123)
@end example

The value of a literal expression is immutable, @ref{lang basic storage
model,Storage model}
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Variable references

@deffn Syntax @meta{variable}
An expression consisting of a variable is a variable reference if it is
not a macro use (see below).  The value of the variable reference is the
value stored in the location to which the variable is bound.  It is a
syntax violation to reference an unbound variable.

The following example examples assumes the base library has been
imported:

@example
(define x 28)
x @result{} 28
@end example
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Procedure calls

@deffn Syntax @meta{operator} @hyperi{operand} @dots{}
A procedure call consists of expressions for the procedure to be called
and the arguments to be passed to it, with enclosing parentheses.  A
form in an expression context is a procedure call if @meta{operator} is
not an identifier bound as a syntactic keyword.

When a procedure call is evaluated, the operator and operand expressions
are evaluated (in an unspecified order) and the resulting procedure is
passed the resulting arguments.

The following examples assume the @rsixlibrary{base} library has been
imported:

@example
(+ 3 4)                 @result{} 7
((if #f + *) 3 4)       @result{} 12
@end example

If the value of @meta{operator} is not a procedure, an exception with
condition type @code{&assertion} is raised.  Also, if @meta{operator}
does not accept as many arguments as there are @meta{operand}s, an
exception with condition type @code{&assertion} is raised.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} In contrast to other dialects of Lisp, the order of
evaluation is unspecified, and the operator expression and the operand
expressions are always evaluated with the same evaluation rules.

Although the order of evaluation is otherwise unspecified, the effect of
any concurrent evaluation of the operator and operand expressions is
constrained to be consistent with some sequential order of evaluation.
The order of evaluation may be chosen differently for each procedure
call.
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note:} In many dialects of Lisp, the form @code{()} is a
legitimate expression.  In Scheme, expressions written as list/pair
forms must have at least one subexpression, so @code{()} is not a
syntactically valid expression.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@c page
@node lang syntax macros
@subsection Macros


@cindex Transformer, definition of
@cindex Definition of transformer
@cindex Macro transformer, definition of
@cindex Definition of macro transformer


Libraries and top--level programs can define and use new kinds of
derived expressions and definitions called @emph{syntactic abstractions}
or @emph{macros}.  A syntactic abstraction is created by binding a
keyword to a @emph{macro transformer} or, simply, @emph{transformer}.

The transformer determines how a use of the macro (called a @emph{macro
use}) is transcribed into a more primitive form.

Most macro uses have the form:

@example
(@meta{keyword} @meta{datum} @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{keyword} is an identifier that uniquely determines the kind
of form.  This identifier is called the @emph{syntactic keyword}, or
simply @emph{keyword}.  The number of @meta{datum}s and the syntax of
each depends on the syntactic abstraction.

Macro uses can also take the form of improper lists, singleton
identifiers, or @func{set!} forms, where the second subform of the
@func{set!} is the keyword:

@example
(@meta{keyword} @meta{datum} @dots{} . @meta{datum})
@meta{keyword}
(set! @meta{keyword} @meta{datum})
@end example

The @func{define-syntax}, @func{let-syntax} and @func{letrec-syntax}
forms create bindings for keywords, associate them with macro
transformers, and control the scope within which they are visible.

The @func{syntax-rules} and @func{identifier-syntax} forms create
transformers via a pattern language.  Moreover, the @func{syntax-case}
form allows creating transformers via arbitrary Scheme code.

Keywords occupy the same name space as variables.  That is, within the
same scope, an identifier can be bound as a variable or keyword, or
neither, but not both, and local bindings of either kind may shadow
other bindings of either kind.

Macros defined using @func{syntax-rules} and @func{identifier-syntax}
are ``hygienic'' and ``referentially transparent'' and thus preserve
Scheme's lexical scoping.

@itemize
@item
If a macro transformer inserts a binding for an identifier (variable or
keyword) not appearing in the macro use, the identifier is in effect
renamed throughout its scope to avoid conflicts with other identifiers.

@item
If a macro transformer inserts a free reference to an identifier, the
reference refers to the binding that was visible where the transformer
was specified, regardless of any local bindings that may surround the
use of the macro.
@end itemize

Macros defined using the @func{syntax-case} facility are also hygienic
unless @func{datum->syntax} is used.

@c page
@node lang expansion
@section Expansion process


@ignore
In the original document this chapter is the file "expansion.tex".
@end ignore


Macro uses are expanded into @emph{core forms} at the start of
evaluation (before compilation or interpretation) by a syntax
@emph{expander}.  The set of core forms is implementation--dependent, as
is the representation of these forms in the expander's output.  If the
expander encounters a syntactic abstraction, it invokes the associated
transformer to expand the syntactic abstraction, then repeats the
expansion process for the form returned by the transformer.  If the
expander encounters a core form, it recursively processes its subforms
that are in expression or definition context, if any, and reconstructs
the form from the expanded subforms.  Information about identifier
bindings is maintained during expansion to enforce lexical scoping for
variables and keywords.

To handle definitions, the expander processes the initial forms in a
@meta{body} or @meta{library body} from left to right.  How the expander
processes each form encountered depends upon the kind of form.

@table @asis
@item macro use
The expander invokes the associated transformer to transform the macro
use, then recursively performs whichever of these actions are
appropriate for the resulting form.

@item @func{define-syntax} form
The expander expands and evaluates the right--hand--side expression and
binds the keyword to the resulting transformer.

@item @func{define} form
The expander records the fact that the defined identifier is a variable
but defers expansion of the right--hand--side expression until after all
of the definitions have been processed.

@item @func{begin} form
The expander splices the subforms into the list of body forms it is
processing.

@item @func{let-syntax} or @func{letrec-syntax} form
The expander splices the inner body forms into the list of (outer) body
forms it is processing, arranging for the keywords bound by the
@func{let-syntax} and @func{letrec-syntax} to be visible only in the
inner body forms.

@item expression, i.e., nondefinition
The expander completes the expansion of the deferred right--hand--side
expressions and the current and remaining expressions in the body, and
then creates the equivalent of a @func{letrec*} form from the defined
variables, expanded right--hand--side expressions, and expanded body
expressions.
@end table

For the right--hand side of the definition of a variable, expansion is
deferred until after all of the definitions have been seen.
Consequently, each keyword and variable reference within the right--hand
side resolves to the local binding, if any.

A definition in the sequence of forms must not define any identifier
whose binding is used to determine the meaning of the undeferred
portions of the definition or any definition that precedes it in the
sequence of forms.  For example, the bodies of the following expressions
violate this restriction.

@example
(let ()
  (define define 17)
  (list define))

(let-syntax ([def0 (syntax-rules ()
                     [(_ x) (define x 0)])])
  (let ([z 3])
    (def0 z)
    (define def0 list)
    (list z)))

(let ()
  (define-syntax foo
    (lambda (e)
      (+ 1 2)))
  (define + 2)
  (foo))
@end example

The following do not violate the restriction.

@example
(let ([x 5])
  (define lambda list)
  (lambda x x))         @result{}  (5 5)

(let-syntax ([def0 (syntax-rules ()
                     [(_ x) (define x 0)])])
  (let ([z 3])
    (define def0 list)
    (def0 z)
    (list z)))          @result{}  (3)

(let ()
  (define-syntax foo
    (lambda (e)
      (let ([+ -]) (+ 1 2))))
  (define + 2)
  (foo))                @result{}  -1
@end example

The implementation should treat a violation of the restriction as a
syntax violation.

Note that this algorithm does not directly reprocess any form.  It
requires a single left--to--right pass over the definitions followed by
a single pass (in any order) over the body expressions and deferred
right--hand sides.

Example:

@example
(lambda (x)
  (define-syntax defun
    (syntax-rules ()
      [(_ x a e) (define x (lambda a e))]))
  (defun even? (n) (or (= n 0) (odd? (- n 1))))
  (define-syntax odd?
    (syntax-rules () [(_ n) (not (even? n))]))
  (odd? (if (odd? x) (* x x) x)))
@end example

In the example:

@enumerate
@item
The definition of @func{defun} is encountered first, and the keyword
@func{defun} is associated with the transformer resulting from the
expansion and evaluation of the corresponding right--hand side.

@item
A use of @func{defun} is encountered next and expands into a
@func{define} form.  Expansion of the right--hand side of this
@func{define} form is deferred.

@item
The definition of @func{odd?} is next and results in the association of
the keyword @func{odd?} with the transformer resulting from expanding
and evaluating the corresponding right--hand side.

@item
A use of @func{odd?}  appears next and is expanded; the resulting call
to @func{not} is recognized as an expression because @func{not} is bound
as a variable.

@item
At this point, the expander completes the expansion of the current
expression (the call to @func{not}) and the deferred right--hand side of
the @func{even?}  definition; the uses of @func{odd?} appearing in these
expressions are expanded using the transformer associated with the
keyword @func{odd?}.

@item
The final output is the equivalent of:

@example
(lambda (x)
  (letrec* ([even?
              (lambda (n)
                (or (= n 0)
                    (not (even? (- n 1)))))])
    (not (even? (if (not (even? x)) (* x x) x)))))
@end example

@noindent
although the structure of the output is implementation-dependent.
@end enumerate

Because definitions and expressions can be interleaved in a
@meta{top-level body}, the expander's processing of a @meta{top-level
body} is somewhat more complicated.  It behaves as described above for a
@meta{body} or @meta{library body} with the following exceptions:

@itemize
@item
When the expander finds a nondefinition, it defers its expansion and
continues scanning for definitions.

@item
Once it reaches the end of the set of forms, it processes the deferred
right--hand--side and body expressions, then generates the equivalent of
a @func{letrec*} form from the defined variables, expanded
right--hand--side expressions, and expanded body expressions.

@item
For each body expression @meta{expression} that appears before a
variable definition in the body, a dummy binding is created at the
corresponding place within the set of @func{letrec*} bindings, with a
fresh temporary variable on the left--hand side and the equivalent of:

@example
(begin @meta{expression} @meta{unspecified})
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{unspecified} is a side--effect--free expression returning an
unspecified value, on the right--hand side, so that left--to--right
evaluation order is preserved.  The @func{begin} wrapper allows
@meta{expression} to evaluate to an arbitrary number of values.
@end itemize

@c page
@node lang derived
@section Sample definitions for derived forms


@ignore
In the original document this appendix is the file "derived.tex".
@end ignore

This appendix contains sample definitions for some of the keywords
described in this report in terms of simpler forms:

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @func{cond}

The @func{cond} keyword could be defined in terms of @func{if},
@func{let} and @func{begin} using @func{syntax-rules} as follows:

@example
(define-syntax cond
  (syntax-rules (else =>)
    ((cond (else result1 result2 ...))
     (begin result1 result2 ...))
    ((cond (test => result))
     (let ((temp test))
       (if temp (result temp))))
    ((cond (test => result) clause1 clause2 ...)
     (let ((temp test))
       (if temp
           (result temp)
           (cond clause1 clause2 ...))))
    ((cond (test)) test)
    ((cond (test) clause1 clause2 ...)
     (let ((temp test))
       (if temp
           temp
           (cond clause1 clause2 ...))))
    ((cond (test result1 result2 ...))
     (if test (begin result1 result2 ...)))
    ((cond (test result1 result2 ...)
           clause1 clause2 ...)
     (if test
         (begin result1 result2 ...)
         (cond clause1 clause2 ...)))))
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @func{case}

The @func{case} keyword could be defined in terms of @func{let},
@func{cond}, and @func{memv} using @code{syntax-rules} as follows:

@example
(define-syntax case
  (syntax-rules (else)
    ((case expr0
       ((key ...) res1 res2 ...)
       ...
       (else else-res1 else-res2 ...))
     (let ((tmp expr0))
       (cond
         ((memv tmp '(key ...)) res1 res2 ...)
         ...
         (else else-res1 else-res2 ...))))
    ((case expr0
       ((keya ...) res1a res2a ...)
       ((keyb ...) res1b res2b ...)
       ...)
     (let ((tmp expr0))
       (cond
         ((memv tmp '(keya ...)) res1a res2a ...)
         ((memv tmp '(keyb ...)) res1b res2b ...)
         ...)))))
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @func{let*}

The @func{let*} keyword could be defined in terms of @func{let} using
@func{syntax-rules} as follows:

@example
(define-syntax let*
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((let* () body1 body2 ...)
     (let () body1 body2 ...))
    ((let* ((name1 expr1) (name2 expr2) ...)
       body1 body2 ...)
     (let ((name1 expr1))
       (let* ((name2 expr2) ...)
         body1 body2 ...)))))
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @func{letrec}

The @func{letrec} keyword could be defined approximately in terms of
@func{let} and @func{set!} using @func{syntax-rules}, using a helper to
generate the temporary variables needed to hold the values before the
assignments are made, as follows:

@example
(define-syntax letrec
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((letrec () body1 body2 ...)
     (let () body1 body2 ...))
    ((letrec ((var init) ...) body1 body2 ...)
     (letrec-helper
       (var ...)
       ()
       ((var init) ...)
       body1 body2 ...))))

(define-syntax letrec-helper
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((letrec-helper
       ()
       (temp ...)
       ((var init) ...)
       body1 body2 ...)
     (let ((var <undefined>) ...)
       (let ((temp init) ...)
         (set! var temp)
         ...)
       (let () body1 body2 ...)))
    ((letrec-helper
       (x y ...)
       (temp ...)
       ((var init) ...)
       body1 body2 ...)
     (letrec-helper
       (y ...)
       (newtemp temp ...)
       ((var init) ...)
       body1 body2 ...))))
@end example

The syntax @code{<undefined>} represents an expression that returns
something that, when stored in a location, causes an exception with
condition type @code{&assertion} to be raised if an attempt to read from
or write to the location occurs before the assignments generated by the
@func{letrec} transformation take place.  (No such expression is defined
in Scheme.)

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @func{letrec*}

The @func{letrec*} keyword could be defined approximately in terms of
@func{let} and @func{set!} using @func{syntax-rules} as follows:

@example
(define-syntax letrec*
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((letrec* ((var1 init1) ...) body1 body2 ...)
     (let ((var1 <undefined>) ...)
       (set! var1 init1)
       ...
       (let () body1 body2 ...)))))
@end example

The syntax @code{<undefined>} is as in the definition of @func{letrec}
above.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @func{let-values}

The following definition of @func{let-values} using @func{syntax-rules}
employs a pair of helpers to create temporary names for the formals.

@example
(define-syntax let-values
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((let-values (binding ...) body1 body2 ...)
     (let-values-helper1
       ()
       (binding ...)
       body1 body2 ...))))

(define-syntax let-values-helper1
  ;; map over the bindings
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((let-values
       ((id temp) ...)
       ()
       body1 body2 ...)
     (let ((id temp) ...) body1 body2 ...))
    ((let-values
       assocs
       ((formals1 expr1) (formals2 expr2) ...)
       body1 body2 ...)
     (let-values-helper2
       formals1
       ()
       expr1
       assocs
       ((formals2 expr2) ...)
       body1 body2 ...))))

(define-syntax let-values-helper2
  ;; create temporaries for the formals
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((let-values-helper2
       ()
       temp-formals
       expr1
       assocs
       bindings
       body1 body2 ...)
     (call-with-values
       (lambda () expr1)
       (lambda temp-formals
         (let-values-helper1
           assocs
           bindings
           body1 body2 ...))))
    ((let-values-helper2
       (first . rest)
       (temp ...)
       expr1
       (assoc ...)
       bindings
       body1 body2 ...)
     (let-values-helper2
       rest
       (temp ... newtemp)
       expr1
       (assoc ... (first newtemp))
       bindings
       body1 body2 ...))
    ((let-values-helper2
       rest-formal
       (temp ...)
       expr1
       (assoc ...)
       bindings
       body1 body2 ...)
     (call-with-values
       (lambda () expr1)
       (lambda (temp ... . newtemp)
         (let-values-helper1
           (assoc ... (rest-formal newtemp))
           bindings
           body1 body2 ...))))))
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @func{let*-values}

The following macro defines @func{let*-values} in terms of @func{let}
and @func{let-values} using @func{syntax-rules}:

@example
(define-syntax let*-values
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((let*-values () body1 body2 ...)
     (let () body1 body2 ...))
    ((let*-values (binding1 binding2 ...)
       body1 body2 ...)
     (let-values (binding1)
       (let*-values (binding2 ...)
         body1 body2 ...)))))
@end example


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @func{let}

The @func{let} keyword could be defined in terms of @func{lambda} and
@func{letrec} using @func{syntax-rules} as follows:

@example
(define-syntax @func{let}
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((let ((name val) ...) body1 body2 ...)
     ((lambda (name ...) body1 body2 ...)
      val ...))
    ((let tag ((name val) ...) body1 body2 ...)
     ((letrec ((tag (lambda (name ...)
                      body1 body2 ...)))
        tag)
      val ...))))
@end example

@c page
@node baselib
@chapter Base library


@ignore
In the original document this chapter is the "base.tex" file.
@end ignore

This chapter describes Scheme's @rsixlibrary{base} library, which
exports many of the procedure and syntax bindings that are traditionally
associated with Scheme.


@menu
* baselib types::               Base types.
* baselib definitions::         Definitions.
* baselib bodies::              Bodies.
* baselib expressions::         Expressions.
* baselib predicates::          Equivalence and procedure predicates.
* baselib math::                Mathematics.
* baselib booleans::            Booleans.
* baselib lists::               Pairs and lists.
* baselib symbols::             Symbols.
* baselib characters::          Characters.
* baselib strings::             Strings.
* baselib vectors::             Vectors.
* baselib errors::              Errors and violations.
* baselib control::             Control features.
* baselib iteration::           Iteration.
* baselib quasiquotation::      Quasiquotation.
* baselib syntax binding::      Binding constructs for syntactic keywords.
* baselib transformers::        Macro transformers.
* baselib tail call::           Tail calls and tail contexts.
@end menu


@c page
@node baselib types
@section Base types


No object satisfies more than one of the following predicates:

@example
boolean?          pair?
symbol?           number?
char?             string?
vector?           procedure?
null?
@end example

These predicates define the base types @emph{boolean}, @emph{pair},
@emph{symbol}, @emph{number}, @emph{char} (or @emph{character}),
@emph{string}, @emph{vector}, and @emph{procedure}.  Moreover, the empty
list is a special object of its own type.

Note that, although there is a separate boolean type, any Scheme value
can be used as a boolean value for the purpose of a conditional test.


@c page
@node baselib definitions
@section Definitions


Definitions may appear within a @meta{top-level body}, at the top of a
@meta{library body}, or at the top of a @meta{body}.

A @meta{definition} may be a variable definition or keyword definition.
Macro uses that expand into definitions or groups of definitions
(packaged in a @func{begin}, @func{let-syntax}, or @func{letrec-syntax}
form) may also appear wherever other definitions may appear.


@menu
* baselib definitions variables::  Variables definitions.
* baselib definitions syntax::     Syntax definitions.
@end menu


@c page
@node baselib definitions variables
@subsection Variables definitions


The @func{define} form described in this section is a @meta{definition}
used to create variable bindings and may appear anywhere other
definitions may appear.


@deffn Syntax define @meta{variable} @hyper{expression}
@deffnx Syntax define @meta{variable}
@deffnx Syntax define @meta{variable} @hyper{formals} @hyper{body}
@deffnx Syntax define (@meta{variable} . @hyper{formal}) @hyper{body}
The first from of @func{define} binds @meta{variable} to a new location
before assigning the value of @meta{expression} to it.

@example
(define add3
  (lambda (x) (+ x 3)))
(add3 3)                            @result{}  6
(define first car)
(first '(1 2))                      @result{}  1
@end example

The continuation of @meta{expression} should not be invoked more than
once.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} Implementations should detect
that the continuation of @meta{expression} is invoked more than once.
If the implementation detects this, it must raise an exception with
condition type @code{&assertion}.

The second form of @func{define} is equivalent to:

@example
(define @meta{variable} @hyper{unspecified})
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{unspecified} is a side--effect--free expression returning an
unspecified value.

In the third form of @func{define}, @meta{formals} must be either a
sequence of zero or more variables, or a sequence of one or more
variables followed by a dot @code{.} and another variable (as in a
lambda expression).  This form is equivalent to:

@example
(define @meta{variable}
  (lambda (@meta{formals}) @hyper{body}))
@end example

In the fourth form of @func{define}, @meta{formal} must be a single
variable.  This form is equivalent to:

@example
(define @meta{variable}
  (lambda @meta{formal} @hyper{body}))
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node baselib definitions syntax
@subsection Syntax definitions


The @code{define-syntax} form described in this section is a
@meta{definition} used to create keyword bindings and may appear
anywhere other definitions may appear.


@deffn Syntax define-syntax @meta{keyword} @hyper{expression}
Binds @meta{keyword} to the value of @meta{expression}, which must
evaluate, at macro--expansion time, to a transformer.  Macro
transformers can be created using the @func{syntax-rules} and
@func{identifier-syntax} forms.

Keyword bindings established by @func{define-syntax} are visible
throughout the body in which they appear, except where shadowed by other
bindings, and nowhere else, just like variable bindings established by
@func{define}.  All bindings established by a set of definitions,
whether keyword or variable definitions, are visible within the
definitions themselves.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation should
detect if the value of @meta{expression} cannot possibly be a
transformer.

Example:

@example
(let ()
  (define even?
    (lambda (x)
      (or (= x 0) (odd? (- x 1)))))
  (define-syntax odd?
    (syntax-rules ()
      ((odd?  x) (not (even? x)))))
  (even? 10))
@result{} #t
@end example

An implication of the left--to--right processing order is that one
definition can affect whether a subsequent form is also a definition.

Example:

@example
(let ()
  (define-syntax bind-to-zero
    (syntax-rules ()
      ((bind-to-zero id) (define id 0))))
  (bind-to-zero x)
  x)
@result{} 0
@end example

The behavior is unaffected by any binding for @func{bind-to-zero} that
might appear outside of the @func{let} expression.
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib bodies
@section Bodies


The @meta{body} of a @func{lambda}, @func{let}, @func{let*},
@func{let-values}, @func{let*-values}, @func{letrec}, or @func{letrec*}
expression, or that of a definition with a body consists of zero or more
definitions followed by one or more expressions.

@example
@meta{definition} @dots{} @hyperi{expression} @hyperii{expression} @dots{}
@end example

Each identifier defined by a definition is local to the @meta{body}.
That is, the identifier is bound, and the region of the binding is the
entire @meta{body}.

Example:

@example
(let ((x 5))
  (define foo (lambda (y) (bar x y)))
  (define bar (lambda (a b) (+ (* a b) a)))
  (foo (+ x 3)))
@result{}  45
@end example

When @func{begin}, @func{let-syntax}, or @func{letrec-syntax} forms
occur in a body prior to the first expression, they are spliced into the
body.  Some or all of the body, including portions wrapped in
@func{begin}, @func{let-syntax}, or @func{letrec-syntax} forms, may be
specified by a macro use.

An expanded @meta{body} containing variable definitions can always be
converted into an equivalent @func{letrec*} expression.  For example,
the @func{let} expression in the above example is equivalent to

@example
(let ((x 5))
  (letrec* ((foo (lambda (y) (bar x y)))
            (bar (lambda (a b) (+ (* a b) a))))
    (foo (+ x 3))))
@end example


@c page
@node baselib expressions
@section Expressions


The entries in this section describe the expressions of the
@rsixlibrary{base} library, which may occur in the position of the
@meta{expression} syntactic variable in addition to the primitive
expression types.


@menu
* baselib expressions quotation::       Quotation.
* baselib expressions procedures::      Procedures.
* baselib expressions conditionals::    Conditionals.
* baselib expressions assignments::     Assignments.
* baselib expressions derived cond::    Derived conditionals.
* baselib expressions binding::         Binding constructs.
* baselib expressions sequencing::      Sequencing.
@end menu

@c page
@node baselib expressions quotation
@subsection Quotation


@deffn Syntax quote @meta{datum}
@meta{Datum} should be a syntactic datum.  @code{(quote @meta{datum})}
evaluates to the datum value represented by @meta{datum}.  This notation
is used to include constants.

@example
(quote a)               @result{} a
(quote #(a b c))        @result{} #(a b c)
(quote (+ 1 2))         @result{} (+ 1 2)
@end example

@code{(quote @meta{datum})} may be abbreviated as @code{'@meta{datum}}:

@example
'"abc"               @result{} "abc"
'145932              @result{} 145932
'a                   @result{} a
'#(a b c)            @result{} #(a b c)
'()                  @result{} ()
'(+ 1 2)             @result{} (+ 1 2)
'(quote a)           @result{} (quote a)
''a                  @result{} (quote a)
@end example

Constants are immutable.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Different constants that are the value of a @func{quote}
expression may share the same locations.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib expressions procedures
@subsection Procedures


@deffn Syntax lambda @meta{formals} @hyper{body}
@meta{formals} must be a formal parameter list as described below, and
@meta{body} must be as described in @ref{baselib bodies}.

A @func{lambda} evaluates to a procedure.  The environment in effect
when the @func{lambda} is evaluated is remembered as part of the
procedure.  When the procedure is later called with some arguments, the
environment in which the @func{lambda} was evaluated is extended by
binding the variables in the parameter list to fresh locations, and the
resulting argument values are stored in those locations.  Then, the
expressions in the body of the @func{lambda} (which may contain
definitions and thus represent a @func{letrec*} form) are evaluated
sequentially in the extended environment.  The results of the last
expression in the body are returned as the results of the procedure
call.

@example
(lambda (x) (+ x x))      @result{} a procedure
((lambda (x) (+ x x)) 4)  @result{} 8

((lambda (x)
   (define (p y)
     (+ y 1))
   (+ (p x) x))
 5) @result{} 11

(define reverse-subtract
  (lambda (x y) (- y x)))
(reverse-subtract 7 10)         @result{} 3

(define add4
  (let ((x 4))
    (lambda (y) (+ x y))))
(add4 6)                        @result{} 10
@end example

@meta{formals} must have one of the following forms:

@table @code
@item (@hyperi{variable} @dots{})
The procedure takes a fixed number of arguments; when the procedure is
called, the arguments are stored in the bindings of the corresponding
variables.

@item @meta{variable}
The procedure takes any number of arguments; when the procedure is
called, the sequence of arguments is converted into a newly allocated
list, and the list is stored in the binding of the @meta{variable}.

@item (@hyperi{variable} @dots{} @meta{variableN} . @meta{variableN+1})
If a period @code{.} precedes the last variable, then the procedure
takes @var{n} or more arguments, where @var{n} is the number of
parameters before the period (there must be at least one).  The value
stored in the binding of the last variable is a newly allocated list of
the arguments left over after all the other arguments have been matched
up against the other parameters.

@example
((lambda x x) 3 4 5 6)          @result{} (3 4 5 6)
((lambda (x y . z) z)
 3 4 5 6)                       @result{} (5 6)
@end example
@end table

Any @meta{variable} must not appear more than once in @meta{formals}.
@end deffn



@c page
@node baselib expressions conditionals
@subsection Conditionals


@deffn Syntax if @meta{test} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if @meta{test} @meta{consequent}
@meta{test}, @meta{consequent}, and @meta{alternate} must be
expressions.

An @func{if} expression is evaluated as follows: first, @meta{test} is
evaluated.  If it yields a true value, then @meta{consequent} is
evaluated and its values are returned.  Otherwise @meta{alternate} is
evaluated and its values are returned.  If @meta{test} yields @false{}
and no @meta{alternate} is specified, then the result of the expression
is unspecified.

@example
(if (> 3 2) 'yes 'no)           @result{} yes
(if (> 2 3) 'yes 'no)           @result{} no
(if (> 3 2)
    (- 3 2)
    (+ 3 2))                    @result{} 1
(if #f #f)                      @result{} unspecified
@end example

The @meta{consequent} and @meta{alternate} expressions are in tail
context if the @func{if} expression itself is.
@end deffn

@c page
@node baselib expressions assignments
@subsection Assignments


@deffn Syntax set! @meta{variable} @meta{expression}
@meta{expression} is evaluated, and the resulting value is stored in the
location to which @meta{variable} is bound.  @meta{variable} must be
bound either in some region expression or at the top level.  The result
of the @func{set!} expression is unspecified.

@example
(let ((x 2))
  (+ x 1)
  (set! x 4)
  (+ x 1)) @result{} 5
@end example

It is a syntax violation if @meta{variable} refers to an immutable
binding.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The identifier @func{set!} is exported with level @emph{1}
as well.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@c page
@node baselib expressions derived cond
@subsection Derived conditionals


@deffn Syntax cond @hyperi{cond clause} @hyperii{cond clause} @dots{}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} {=>}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} else
Each @meta{cond clause} must be of the form:

@example
(@meta{test} @hyperi{expression} @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{test} is an expression.  Alternatively, a @meta{cond clause}
may be of the form:

@example
(@meta{test} => @meta{expression})
@end example

The last @meta{cond clause} may be an ``@code{else} clause'', which has
the form:

@example
(else @hyperi{expression} @hyperii{expression} @dots{})
@end example

A @func{cond} expression is evaluated by evaluating the @meta{test}
expressions of successive @meta{cond clause}s in order until one of them
evaluates to a true value.  When a @meta{test} evaluates to a true
value, then the remaining @meta{expression}s in its @meta{cond clause}
are evaluated in order, and the results of the last @meta{expression} in
the @meta{cond clause} are returned as the results of the entire
@func{cond} expression.

If the selected @meta{cond clause} contains only the @meta{test} and no
@meta{expression}s, then the value of the @meta{test} is returned as the
result.  If the selected @meta{cond clause} uses the @code{=>} alternate
form, then the @meta{expression} is evaluated.  Its value must be a
procedure.  This procedure should accept one argument; it is called on
the value of the @meta{test} and the values returned by this procedure
are returned by the @func{cond} expression.

If all @meta{test}s evaluate to @false{}, and there is no @code{else}
clause, then the conditional expression returns unspecified values; if
there is an @code{else} clause, then its @meta{expression}s are
evaluated, and the values of the last one are returned.

@example
(cond ((> 3 2) 'greater)
      ((< 3 2) 'less))          @result{} greater

(cond ((> 3 3) 'greater)
      ((< 3 3) 'less)
      (else 'equal))            @result{} equal

(cond ('(1 2 3) => cadr)
      (else #f))                @result{} 2
@end example

For a @meta{cond clause} of one of the following forms:

@example
(@meta{test} @hyperi{expression} @dots{})
(else @hyperi{expression} @hyperii{expression} @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
the last @meta{expression} is in tail context if the @func{cond} form
itself is.  For a @meta{cond clause} of the form:

@example
(@meta{test} => @meta{expression})
@end example

@noindent
the (implied) call to the procedure that results from the evaluation of
@meta{expression} is in a tail context if the @func{cond} form itself
is.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax case @meta{key} @hyperi{case clause} @hyperii{case clause} @dots{}
@meta{key} must be an expression.  Each @meta{case clause} must have one
of the following forms:

@example
((@hyperi{datum} @dots{}) @hyperi{expression} @hyperii{expression} @dots{})
(else @hyperi{expression} @hyperii{expression} @dots{})
@end example

The second form, which specifies an ``@code{else} clause'', may only
appear as the last @meta{case clause}.  Each @meta{datum} is an external
representation of some object.  The data represented by the
@meta{datum}s need not be distinct.

A @func{case} expression is evaluated as follows.

@enumerate
@item
@meta{key} is evaluated and its result is compared using @func{eqv?}
against the data represented by the @meta{datum}s of each @meta{case
clause} in turn, proceeding in order from left to right through the set
of clauses.

@item
If the result of evaluating @meta{key} is equivalent to a datum of a
@meta{case clause}, the corresponding @meta{expression}s are evaluated
from left to right and the results of the last expression in the
@meta{case clause} are returned as the results of the @func{case}
expression.  Otherwise, the comparison process continues.

@item
If the result of evaluating @meta{key} is different from every datum in
each set, then if there is an @code{else} clause its expressions are
evaluated and the results of the last are the results of the @func{case}
expression; otherwise the @func{case} expression returns unspecified
values.
@end enumerate

@example
(case (* 2 3)
  ((2 3 5 7) 'prime)
  ((1 4 6 8 9) 'composite))     @result{} composite
(case (car '(c d))
  ((a) 'a)
  ((b) 'b))                     @result{} unspecified
(case (car '(c d))
  ((a e i o u) 'vowel)
  ((w y) 'semivowel)
  (else 'consonant))            @result{} consonant
@end example

The last @meta{expression} of a @meta{case clause} is in tail context if
the @func{case} expression itself is.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax and @hyperi{test} @dots{}
The @meta{test}s must be expressions.

If there are no @meta{test}s, @true{} is returned.  Otherwise, the
@meta{test} expressions are evaluated from left to right until a
@meta{test} returns @false{} or the last @meta{test} is reached.  In the
former case, the @func{and} expression returns @false{} without
evaluating the remaining expressions.  In the latter case, the last
expression is evaluated and its values are returned.

@example
(and (= 2 2) (> 2 1))           @result{}  #t
(and (= 2 2) (< 2 1))           @result{}  #f
(and 1 2 'c '(f g))             @result{}  (f g)
(and)                           @result{}  #t
@end example

The @func{and} keyword could be defined in terms of @func{if} using
@func{syntax-rules} as follows:

@example
(define-syntax and
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((and) #t)
    ((and test) test)
    ((and test1 test2 ...)
     (if test1 (and test2 ...) #t))))
@end example

The last @meta{test} expression is in tail context if the @func{and}
expression itself is.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax or @hyperi{test} @dots{}
The @meta{test}s must be expressions.

If there are no @meta{test}s, @false{} is returned.  Otherwise, the
@meta{test} expressions are evaluated from left to right until a
@meta{test} returns a true value @var{val} or the last @meta{test} is
reached.  In the former case, the @func{or} expression returns @var{val}
without evaluating the remaining expressions.  In the latter case, the
last expression is evaluated and its values are returned.

@example
(or (= 2 2) (> 2 1))            @result{} #t
(or (= 2 2) (< 2 1))            @result{} #t
(or #f #f #f)                   @result{} #f
(or '(b c) (/ 3 0))             @result{} (b c)
@end example

The @func{or} keyword could be defined in terms of @func{if} using
@func{syntax-rules} as follows:

@example
(define-syntax or
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((or) #f)
    ((or test) test)
    ((or test1 test2 ...)
     (let ((x test1))
       (if x x (or test2 ...))))))
@end example

The last @meta{test} expression is in tail context if the @func{or}
expression itself is.
@end deffn

@c page
@node baselib expressions binding
@subsection Binding constructs


The binding constructs described in this section create local bindings
for variables that are visible only in a delimited region.  The syntax
of the constructs @func{let}, @func{let*}, @func{letrec}, and
@func{letrec*} is identical, but they differ in the regions they
establish for their variable bindings and in the order in which the
values for the bindings are computed.

@itemize
@item
In a @func{let} expression, the initial values are computed before any
of the variables become bound; in a @func{let*} expression, the bindings
and evaluations are performed sequentially.

@item
In a @func{letrec} or @func{letrec*} expression, all the bindings are in
effect while their initial values are being computed, thus allowing
mutually recursive definitions.

@item
In a @func{letrec} expression, the initial values are computed before
being assigned to the variables; in a @func{letrec*}, the evaluations
and assignments are performed sequentially.
@end itemize

In addition, the binding constructs @func{let-values} and
@func{let*-values} generalize @func{let} and @func{let*} to allow
multiple variables to be bound to the results of expressions that
evaluate to multiple values.  They are analogous to @func{let} and
@func{let*} in the way they establish regions: in a @func{let-values}
expression, the initial values are computed before any of the variables
become bound; in a @func{let*-values} expression, the bindings are
performed sequentially.

@deffn Syntax let @meta{bindings} @meta{body}
@meta{bindings} must have the form:

@example
((@hyperi{variable} @metai{init}) @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
where each @meta{init} is an expression, and @meta{body} is as described
in @ref{baselib bodies}.  Any variable must not appear more than once in
the @meta{variable}s.

The @meta{init}s are evaluated in the current environment (in some
unspecified order), the @meta{variable}s are bound to fresh locations
holding the results, the @meta{body} is evaluated in the extended
environment, and the values of the last expression of @meta{body} are
returned.  Each binding of a @meta{variable} has @meta{body} as its
region.

@example
(let ((x 2) (y 3))
  (* x y))                      @result{} 6

(let ((x 2) (y 3))
  (let ((x 7)
        (z (+ x y)))
    (* z x)))                   @result{} 35
@end example

See also named @func{let}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax {let*} @meta{bindings} @meta{body}
@meta{bindings} must have the form:

@example
((@hyperi{variable} @metai{init}) @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
where each @meta{init} is an expression, and @meta{body} is as described
in @ref{baselib bodies}.

The @func{let*} form is similar to @func{let}, but the @meta{init}s are
evaluated and bindings created sequentially from left to right, with the
region of each binding including the bindings to its right as well as
@meta{body}.  Thus the second @meta{init} is evaluated in an environment
in which the first binding is visible and initialized, and so on.

@example
(let ((x 2) (y 3))
  (let* ((x 7)
         (z (+ x y)))
    (* z x)))             @result{} 70
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} While the variables bound by a @func{let} expression must
be distinct, the variables bound by a @func{let*} expression need not be
distinct.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax letrec @meta{bindings} @meta{body}
@meta{bindings} must have the form:

@example
((@hyperi{variable} @metai{init}) @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
where each @meta{init} is an expression, and @meta{body} is as described
in @ref{baselib bodies}.  Any variable must not appear more than once in
the @meta{variable}s.

The @meta{variable}s are bound to fresh locations, the @meta{init}s are
evaluated in the resulting environment (in some unspecified order), each
@meta{variable} is assigned to the result of the corresponding
@meta{init}, the @meta{body} is evaluated in the resulting environment,
and the values of the last expression in @meta{body} are returned.  Each
binding of a @meta{variable} has the entire @func{letrec} expression as
its region, making it possible to define mutually recursive procedures.

@example
(letrec ((even?
          (lambda (n)
            (if (zero? n)
                \schtrue
                (odd? (- n 1)))))
         (odd?
          (lambda (n)
            (if (zero? n)
                \schfalse
                (even? (- n 1))))))
  (even? 88))
@result{} #t
@end example

It should be possible to evaluate each @meta{init} without assigning or
referring to the value of any @meta{variable}.  In the most common uses
of @func{letrec}, all the @meta{init}s are @func{lambda}s and the
restriction is satisfied automatically.  Another restriction is that the
continuation of each @meta{init} should not be invoked more than once.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} Implementations must detect
references to a @meta{variable} during the evaluation of the @meta{init}
expressions (using one particular evaluation order and order of
evaluating the @meta{init} expressions).  If an implementation detects
such a violation of the restriction, it must raise an exception with
condition type @code{&assertion}.  Implementations may or may not detect
that the continuation of each @meta{init} is invoked more than once.
However, if the implementation detects this, it must raise an exception
with condition type @code{&assertion}.
@end deffn

@deffn Syntax {letrec*} @meta{bindings} @meta{body}
@meta{bindings} must have the form:

@example
((@hyperi{variable} @metai{init}) @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
where each @meta{init} is an expression, and @meta{body} is as described
in @ref{baselib bodies}.  Any variable must not appear more than once in
the @meta{variable}s.

The @meta{variable}s are bound to fresh locations, each @meta{variable}
is assigned in left--to--right order to the result of evaluating the
corresponding @meta{init}, the @meta{body} is evaluated in the resulting
environment, and the values of the last expression in @meta{body} are
returned.  Despite the left--to--right evaluation and assignment order,
each binding of a @meta{variable} has the entire @func{letrec*}
expression as its region, making it possible to define mutually
recursive procedures.

@example
(letrec* ((p
           (lambda (x)
             (+ 1 (q (- x 1)))))
          (q
           (lambda (y)
             (if (zero? y)
                 0
                 (+ 1 (p (- y 1))))))
          (x (p 5))
          (y x))
  y)
@result{}  5
@end example

It must be possible to evaluate each @meta{init} without assigning or
referring to the value of the corresponding @meta{variable} or the
@meta{variable} of any of the bindings that follow it in
@meta{bindings}.  Another restriction is that the continuation of each
@meta{init} should not be invoked more than once.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} Implementations must, during
the evaluation of an @meta{init} expression, detect references to the
value of the corresponding @meta{variable} or the @meta{variable} of any
of the bindings that follow it in @meta{bindings}.  If an implementation
detects such a violation of the restriction, it must raise an exception
with condition type @code{&assertion}.  Implementations may or may not
detect that the continuation of each @meta{init} is invoked more than
once.  However, if the implementation detects this, it must raise an
exception with condition type @code{&assertion}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax let-values @meta{mv-bindings} @meta{body}
@meta{mv-bindings} must have the form:

@example
((@hyperi{formals} @metai{init}) @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
where each @meta{init} is an expression, and @meta{body} is as described
in @ref{baselib bodies}.  Any variable must not appear more than once in
the set of @meta{formals}.

The @meta{init}s are evaluated in the current environment (in some
unspecified order), and the variables occurring in the @meta{formals}
are bound to fresh locations containing the values returned by the
@meta{init}s, where the @meta{formals} are matched to the return values
in the same way that the @meta{formals} in a @func{lambda} are matched
to the arguments in a procedure call.  Then, the @meta{body} is
evaluated in the extended environment, and the values of the last
expression of @meta{body} are returned.  Each binding of a variable has
@meta{body} as its region.  If the @meta{formals} do not match, an
exception with condition type @code{&assertion} is raised.

@example
(let-values (((a b) (values 1 2))
             ((c d) (values 3 4)))
  (list a b c d))
@result{} (1 2 3 4)

(let-values (((a b . c) (values 1 2 3 4)))
  (list a b c))
@result{} (1 2 (3 4))

(let ((a 'a) (b 'b) (x 'x) (y 'y))
  (let-values (((a b) (values x y))
               ((x y) (values a b)))
    (list a b x y)))
@result{} (x y a b)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax {let*-values} @meta{mv-bindings} @meta{body}
@meta{mv-bindings} must have the form:

@example
((@hyperi{formals} @metai{init}) @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
where each @meta{init} is an expression, and @meta{body} is as described
in @ref{baselib bodies}.  In each @meta{formals}, any variable must not
appear more than once.

The @func{let*-values} form is similar to @func{let-values}, but the
@meta{init}s are evaluated and bindings created sequentially from left
to right, with the region including the bindings to its right as well as
@meta{body}.  Thus the second @meta{init} is evaluated in an environment
in which the bindings of the first @meta{formals} is visible and
initialized, and so on.

@example
(let ((a 'a) (b 'b) (x 'x) (y 'y))
  (let*-values (((a b) (values x y))
                ((x y) (values a b)))
    (list a b x y)))
@result{} (x y x y)
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} While all of the variables bound by a @func{let-values}
expression must be distinct, the variables bound by different
@meta{formals} of a @func{let*-values} expression need not be distinct.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib expressions sequencing
@subsection Sequencing


@deffn Syntax begin @meta{form} @dots{}
@deffnx Syntax begin @meta{expression} @meta{expression} @dots{}
The @meta{begin} keyword has two different roles, depending on its
context:

@itemize
@item
It may appear as a form in a @meta{body}, @meta{library body}, or
@meta{top-level body}, or directly nested in a @func{begin} form that
appears in a body.  In this case, the @func{begin} form must have the
shape specified in the first header line.  This use of @func{begin} acts
as a @emph{splicing} form: the forms inside the @meta{body} are spliced
into the surrounding body, as if the @func{begin} wrapper were not
actually present.

A @func{begin} form in a @meta{body} or @meta{library body} must be
non--empty if it appears after the first @meta{expression} within the
body.

@item
It may appear as an ordinary expression and must have the shape
specified in the second header line.  In this case, the
@meta{expression}s are evaluated sequentially from left to right, and
the values of the last @meta{expression} are returned.  This expression
type is used to sequence side effects such as assignments or input and
output.
@end itemize

@example
(define x 0)

(begin (set! x 5)
       (+ x 1))
@result{}  6

(begin (display "4 plus 1 equals ")
       (display (+ 4 1)))
@result{} unspecified
@print{} 4 plus 1 equals 5
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node baselib predicates
@section Equivalence and procedure predicates


A @emph{predicate} is a procedure that always returns a boolean value
(@true{} or @false{}).  An @emph{equivalence predicate} is the
computational analogue of a mathematical equivalence relation (it is
symmetric, reflexive, and transitive).  Of the equivalence predicates
described in this section, @func{eq?} is the finest or most
discriminating, and @func{equal?} is the coarsest.  The @func{eqv?}
predicate is slightly less discriminating than @func{eq?}.


@deffn Procedure {eqv?} @vari{obj} @varii{obj}
The @func{eqv?} procedure defines a useful equivalence relation on
objects.  Briefly, it returns @true{} if @vari{obj} and @varii{obj}
should normally be regarded as the same object and @false{} otherwise.
This relation is left slightly open to interpretation, but the following
partial specification of @func{eqv?} must hold for all implementations.

The @func{eqv?} procedure returns @true{} if one of the following holds:

@itemize
@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are both booleans and are the same according
to the @func{boolean=?} procedure.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are both symbols and are the same according
to the @func{symbol=?} procedure.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are both exact number objects and are
numerically equal (see @code{=}).

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are both inexact number objects, are
numerically equal (see @code{=}), and yield the same results (in the
sense of @func{eqv?}) when passed as arguments to any other procedure
that can be defined as a finite composition of Scheme's standard
arithmetic procedures.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are both characters and are the same
character according to the @code{char=?} procedure.

@item
Both @vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are the empty list.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are objects such as pairs, vectors,
bytevectors (library chapter ``Bytevectors''), strings, hashtables,
records (library chapter ``Records''), ports (library section ``Port
I/O''), or hashtables (library chapter ``Hash tables'') that refer to
the same locations in the store.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are record--type descriptors that are
specified to be @func{eqv?} in library section ``Procedural layer''.
@end itemize

The @func{eqv?} procedure returns @false{} if one of the following
holds:

@itemize
@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are of different types.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are booleans for which the @func{boolean=?}
procedure returns @false{}.

@item
@vari{Obj} and @varii{obj} are symbols for which the @func{symbol=?}
procedure returns @false{}.

@item
One of @vari{obj} and @varii{obj} is an exact number object but the
other is an inexact number object.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are rational number objects for which the
@code{=} procedure returns @false{}.

@item
@vari{Obj} and @varii{obj} yield different results (in the sense of
@func{eqv?}) when passed as arguments to any other procedure that can be
defined as a finite composition of Scheme's standard arithmetic
procedures.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are characters for which the @func{char=?}
procedure returns @false{}.

@item
One of @vari{obj} and @varii{obj} is the empty list, but the other is
not.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are objects such as pairs, vectors,
bytevectors (library chapter ``Bytevectors''), strings, records (library
chapter ``Records''), ports (library section ``Port I/O''), or
hashtables (library chapter ``Hashtables'') that refer to distinct
locations.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are pairs, vectors, strings, or records, or
hashtables, where the applying the same accessor (i.e. @func{car},
@func{cdr}, @func{vector-ref}, @func{string-ref}, or record accessors)
to both yields results for which @func{eqv?} returns @false{}.

@item
@vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are procedures that would behave differently
(return different values or have different side effects) for some
arguments.
@end itemize

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The @func{eqv?} procedure returning @true{} when @vari{obj}
and @varii{obj} are number objects does not imply that @code{=} would
also return @true{} when called with @vari{obj} and @varii{obj} as
arguments.
@end quotation

@example
(eqv? 'a 'a)                     @result{} #t
(eqv? 'a 'b)                     @result{} #f
(eqv? 2 2)                       @result{} #t
(eqv? '() '())                   @result{} #t
(eqv? 100000000 100000000)       @result{} #t
(eqv? (cons 1 2) (cons 1 2))     @result{} #f
(eqv? (lambda () 1)
      (lambda () 2))             @result{} #f
(eqv? #f 'nil)                   @result{} #f
@end example

The following examples illustrate cases in which the above rules do not
fully specify the behavior of @func{eqv?}.  All that can be said about
such cases is that the value returned by @func{eqv?} must be a boolean.

@example
(let ((p (lambda (x) x)))
  (eqv? p p))                   @result{} unspecified

(eqv? "" "")                    @result{} unspecified

(eqv? '#() '#())                @result{} unspecified

(eqv? (lambda (x) x)
      (lambda (x) x))           @result{} unspecified

(eqv? (lambda (x) x)
      (lambda (y) y))           @result{} unspecified

(eqv? +nan.0 +nan.0)            @result{} unspecified
@end example

The next set of examples shows the use of @func{eqv?} with procedures
that have local state.  Calls to @func{gen-counter} must return a
distinct procedure every time, since each procedure has its own internal
counter.  Calls to @func{gen-loser} return procedures that behave
equivalently when called.  However, @func{eqv?} may not detect this
equivalence.

@example
(define gen-counter
  (lambda ()
    (let ((n 0))
      (lambda () (set! n (+ n 1)) n))))
(let ((g (gen-counter)))
  (eqv? g g))           @result{}  unspecified
(eqv? (gen-counter) (gen-counter))
                        @result{}  #f
(define gen-loser
  (lambda ()
    (let ((n 0))
      (lambda () (set! n (+ n 1)) 27))))
(let ((g (gen-loser)))
  (eqv? g g))           @result{}  unspecified
(eqv? (gen-loser) (gen-loser))
                        @result{}  unspecified

(letrec ((f (lambda () (if (eqv? f g) 'both 'f)))
         (g (lambda () (if (eqv? f g) 'both 'g))))
  (eqv? f g)) @result{} unspecified

(letrec ((f (lambda () (if (eqv? f g) 'f 'both)))
         (g (lambda () (if (eqv? f g) 'g 'both))))
  (eqv? f g)) @result{} #f
@end example

Implementations may share structure between constants where appropriate.
Furthermore, a constant may be copied at any time by the implementation
so as to exist simultaneously in different sets of locations.  Thus the
value of @func{eqv?} on constants is sometimes
implementation--dependent.

@example
(eqv? '(a) '(a))                 @result{} unspecified
(eqv? "a" "a")                   @result{} unspecified
(eqv? '(b) (cdr '(a b)))         @result{} unspecified
(let ((x '(a)))
  (eqv? x x))                    @result{} #t
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure eq? @vari{obj} @varii{obj}
The @func{eq?} predicate is similar to @func{eqv?} except that in some
cases it is capable of discerning distinctions finer than those
detectable by @func{eqv?}.

The @func{eq?} and @func{eqv?} predicates are guaranteed to have the
same behavior on symbols, booleans, the empty list, pairs, procedures,
non--empty strings, bytevectors, vectors, and records.  The behavior of
@func{eq?} on number objects and characters is
implementation--dependent, but it always returns either @true{} or
@false{}, and returns @true{} only when @func{eqv?} would also return
@true{}.  The @func{eq?} predicate may also behave differently from
@func{eqv?} on empty vectors, empty bytevectors, and empty strings.

@example
(eq? 'a 'a)                     @result{} #t
(eq? '(a) '(a))                 @result{} unspecified
(eq? (list 'a) (list 'a))       @result{} #f
(eq? "a" "a")                   @result{} unspecified
(eq? "" "")                     @result{} unspecified
(eq? '() '())                   @result{} #t
(eq? 2 2)                       @result{} unspecified
(eq? #\A #\A)                   @result{} unspecified
(eq? car car)                   @result{} #t
(let ((n (+ 2 3)))
  (eq? n n))                    @result{} unspecified
(let ((x '(a)))
  (eq? x x))                    @result{} #t
(let ((x '#()))
  (eq? x x))                    @result{} unspecified
(let ((p (lambda (x) x)))
  (eq? p p))                    @result{} unspecified
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {equal?} @vari{obj} @varii{obj}
The @func{equal?}  predicate returns @true{} if and only if the
(possibly infinite) unfoldings of its arguments into regular trees are
equal as ordered trees.

The @func{equal?} predicate treats pairs and vectors as nodes with
outgoing edges, uses @func{string=?} to compare strings, uses
@func{bytevector=?} to compare bytevectors (@ref{stdlib bytevector}),
and uses @func{eqv?} to compare other nodes.

@example
(equal? 'a 'a)                  @result{}  #t

(equal? '(a) '(a))              @result{}  #t

(equal? '(a (b) c)
        '(a (b) c))             @result{}  #t

(equal? "abc" "abc")            @result{}  #t

(equal? 2 2)                    @result{}  #t

(equal? (make-vector 5 'a)
        (make-vector 5 'a))     @result{}  #t

(equal? '#vu8(1 2 3 4 5)
        (u8-list->bytevector
         '(1 2 3 4 5))          @result{}  #t

(equal? (lambda (x) x)
        (lambda (y) y))         @result{}  unspecified

(let* ((x (list 'a))
       (y (list 'a))
       (z (list x y)))
  (list (equal? z (list y x))
        (equal? z (list x x)))) @result{}  (#t #t)
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The @func{equal?} procedure must always terminate, even if
its arguments contain cycles.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Procedure predicate


@deffn Procedure {procedure?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a procedure, otherwise return @false{}.

@example
(procedure? car)                        @result{} #t
(procedure? 'car)                       @result{} #f
(procedure? (lambda (x) (* x x)))       @result{} #t
(procedure? '(lambda (x) (* x x)))      @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib math
@section Mathematics


The procedures described here implement arithmetic that is generic over
the numerical tower.  The generic procedures described in this section
accept both exact and inexact number objects as arguments, performing
coercions and selecting the appropriate operations as determined by the
numeric subtypes of their arguments.


@menu
* baselib math exactness::      Propagation of exactness and inexactness.
* baselib math infinities::     Representability of infinities and NaNs.
* baselib math semantics::      Semantics of common operations.
* baselib math ops::            Numerical operations.
* baselib math string::         Numerical input and output.
@end menu


@c page
@node baselib math exactness
@subsection Propagation of exactness and inexactness


The procedures listed below must return the mathematically correct exact
result provided all their arguments are exact:

@example
+            -            *
max          min          abs
numerator    denominator  gcd
lcm          floor        ceiling
truncate     round        rationalize
real-part    imag-part    make-rectangular
@end example

The procedures listed below must return the correct exact result
provided all their arguments are exact, and no divisors are zero:

@example
/
div          mod           div-and-mod
div0         mod0          div0-and-mod0
@end example

Moreover, the procedure @func{expt} must return the correct exact result
provided its first argument is an exact real number object and its
second argument is an exact integer object.

The general rule is that the generic operations return the correct exact
result when all of their arguments are exact and the result is
mathematically well--defined, but return an inexact result when any
argument is inexact.  Exceptions to this rule include:

@example
sqrt            exp             log
sin             cos             tan
asin            acos            atan
expt            make-polar      magnitude
angle
@end example

@noindent
which may (but are not required to) return inexact results even when
given exact arguments, as indicated in the specification of these
procedures.

One general exception to the rule above is that an implementation may
return an exact result despite inexact arguments if that exact result
would be the correct result for all possible substitutions of exact
arguments for the inexact ones.  An example is @code{(* 1.0 0)} which
may return either @math{0} (exact) or @math{0.0} (inexact).


@c page
@node baselib math infinities
@subsection Representability of infinities and NaNs


The specification of the numerical operations is written as though
infinities and NaNs are representable, and specifies many operations
with respect to these number objects in ways that are consistent with
the @ieee{} 754 standard for binary floating--point arithmetic.

An implementation of Scheme may or may not represent infinities and
NaNs; however, an implementation must raise a continuable exception with
condition type @code{&no-infinities} or @code{&no-nans} (respectively;
@ref{stdlib arithmetics flonum}) whenever it is unable to represent an
infinity or NaN as specified.  In this case, the continuation of the
exception handler is the continuation that otherwise would have received
the infinity or NaN value.  This requirement also applies to conversions
between number objects and external representations, including the
reading of program source code.

@c page
@node baselib math semantics
@subsection Semantics of common operations


Some operations are the semantic basis for several arithmetic
procedures.  The behavior of these operations is described in this
section for later reference.


@menu
* baselib math semantics integer::      Integer division.
* baselib math semantics trascend::     Transcendental functions.
@end menu


@c page
@node baselib math semantics integer
@subsubsection Integer division


Scheme's operations for performing integer division rely on mathematical
operations @math{div}, @math{mod}, @math{div_0}, and @math{mod_0},
that are defined as follows:

@itemize
@item
@math{div}, @math{mod}, @math{div_0}, and @math{mod_0} each accept
two real numbers @math{x_1} and @math{x_2} as operands, where @math{x_2}
must be nonzero.

@item
@math{div} returns an integer, and @math{mod} returns a real.  Their
results are specified by:

@example
x_1 div x_2 = n_d
x_1 mod x_2 = x_m
@end example

@noindent
where:

@example
x_1 = n_d * x_2 + x_m
0  <= x_m < |x_2|
@end example

Examples:

@example
 123 div  10 =  12
 123 mod  10 =   3
 123 div -10 = -12
 123 mod -10 =   3
-123 div  10 = -13
-123 mod  10 =   7
-123 div -10 =  13
-123 mod -10 =   7
@end example

@item
@math{div_0} and @math{mod_0} are like @math{div} and @math{mod}, except
the result of @math{mod_0} lies within a half--open interval centered on
zero.  The results are specified by:

@example
x_1 div_0 x_2 = n_d
x_1 mod_0 x_2 = x_m
@end example

@noindent
where:

@example
x_1 = n_d * x_2 + x_m
-|x_2/2| <= x_m < |x_2/2|
@end example

Examples:

@example
 123 div_0  10 =  12
 123 mod_0  10 =   3
 123 div_0 -10 = -12
 123 mod_0 -10 =   3
-123 div_0  10 = -12
-123 mod_0  10 =  -3
-123 div_0 -10 =  12
-123 mod_0 -10 =  -3
@end example
@end itemize



@c page
@node baselib math semantics trascend
@subsubsection Transcendental functions


In general, the transcendental functions @math{\log}, @math{\sin^(-1)}
(arcsine), @math{\cos^(-1)} (arccosine), and @math{\tan^(-1)} are
multiply defined.  The value of @math{\log z} is defined to be the one
whose imaginary part lies in the range from @math{-\pi} (inclusive if
@math{-0.0} is distinguished, exclusive otherwise) to @math{\pi}
(inclusive).  @math{\log 0} is undefined.

The value of @math{\log z} for non--real @math{z} is defined in terms of
log on real numbers as:

@example
log z = log |z| + (angle z) i
@end example

@noindent
where @math{angle z} is the angle of @math{z = a * e^(i * b)} specified
as:

@example
angle z = b + 2 pi n
@end example

with @math{-\pi <= angle z <= \pi} and @math{angle z = b + 2 pi n} for
some integer @math{n}.

With the one--argument version of @math{\log} defined this way, the
values of the two--argument--version of @math{\log}, @code{sin^(-1) z},
@math{cos^(-1) z}, @math{tan^(-1) z}, and the two--argument version of
@math{tan^(-1)} are according to the following formulae:

@example
log_b z = (log z)/(log b)
sin^(-1) z = -i log (i z + sqrt(1 - z^2))
cos^(-1) z = pi/2 - sin^(-1) z
tan^(-1) z = (log (1 + i z) - log (1 - i z)) / (2 i)
tan^(-1) x y = angle(x + yi)
@end example

The range of @math{tan^(-1) x y} is as in the following table.  The
asterisk (*) indicates that the entry applies to implementations that
distinguish minus zero.

@multitable {*} {@math{y} condition} {@math{x} condition} {range of result @math{r}}
@headitem @tab @math{y} condition @tab @math{x} condition @tab range of result @math{r}
@item @tab y = 0.0 @tab x > 0.0 @tab 0.0
@item * @tab y = +0.0  @tab x > 0.0 @tab +0.0
@item * @tab y = -0.0 @tab x > 0.0 @tab -0.0
@item @tab y > 0.0 @tab x > 0.0 @tab 0.0 < r < pi/2
@item @tab y > 0.0 @tab x = 0.0 @tab pi/2
@item @tab y > 0.0 @tab x < 0.0 @tab pi/2 < r < pi
@item @tab y = 0.0 @tab x < 0 @tab pi
@item * @tab y = +0.0 @tab x < 0.0 @tab pi
@item * @tab y = -0.0 @tab x < 0.0 @tab -pi
@item @tab y < 0.0 @tab x < 0.0 @tab -pi< r < -pi/2
@item @tab y < 0.0 @tab x = 0.0 @tab -pi/2
@item @tab y < 0.0 @tab x > 0.0 @tab -pi/2 < r < 0.0
@item @tab y = 0.0 @tab x = 0.0 @tab undefined
@item * @tab y = +0.0 @tab x = +0.0 @tab +0.0
@item * @tab y = -0.0 @tab x = +0.0 @tab -0.0
@item * @tab y = +0.0 @tab x = -0.0 @tab pi
@item * @tab y = -0.0 @tab x = -0.0 @tab -pi
@item * @tab y = +0.0 @tab x = 0 @tab pi/2
@item * @tab y = -0.0 @tab x = 0 @tab -pi/2
@end multitable

@c page
@node baselib math ops
@subsection Numerical operations


@menu
* baselib math ops type pred::          Numerical type predicates.
* baselib math ops exactness::          Generic conversion.
* baselib math ops value pred::         Value predicates.
* baselib math ops comparison::         Comparison.
* baselib math ops arithmetic::         Arithmetic operations.
* baselib math ops part::               Part separation.
* baselib math ops trascend::           Trascendental functions.
* baselib math ops exponentiation::     Exponentiation functions.
* baselib math ops complex::            Complex numbers functions.
@end menu


@c page
@node baselib math ops type pred
@subsubsection Numerical type predicates


@deffn Procedure {number?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {complex?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {real?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {rational?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {integer?} @var{obj}
These numerical type predicates can be applied to any kind of argument.
They return @true{} if the object is a number object of the named type,
and @false{} otherwise.  In general, if a type predicate is true of a
number object then all higher type predicates are also true of that
number object.  Consequently, if a type predicate is false of a number
object, then all lower type predicates are also false of that number
object.

If @var{z} is a complex number object, then @code{(real? @var{z})} is
true if and only if @code{(zero? (imag-part @var{z}))} and @code{(exact?
(imag-part @var{z}))} are both true.

If @var{x} is a real number object, then @code{(rational? @var{x})} is
true if and only if there exist exact integer objects @vari{k} and
@varii{k} such that @code{(= @var{x} (/ @vari{k} @varii{k}))} and
@code{(= (numerator @var{x}) @vari{k})} and @code{(= (denominator
@var{x}) @varii{k})} are all true.  Thus infinities and NaNs are not
rational number objects.

If @var{q} is a rational number objects, then @code{(integer? @var{q})}
is true if and only if @code{(= (denominator @var{q}) 1)} is true.  If
@var{q} is not a rational number object, then @code{(integer? @var{q})}
is @false{}.

@example
(complex? 3+4i)                        @result{} #t
(complex? 3)                           @result{} #t
(real? 3)                              @result{} #t
(real? -2.5+0.0i)                      @result{} #f
(real? -2.5+0i)                        @result{} #t
(real? -2.5)                           @result{} #t
(real? #e1e10)                         @result{} #t
(rational? 6/10)                       @result{} #t
(rational? 6/3)                        @result{} #t
(rational? 2)                          @result{} #t
(integer? 3+0i)                        @result{} #t
(integer? 3.0)                         @result{} #t
(integer? 8/4)                         @result{} #t

(number? +nan.0)                       @result{} #t
(complex? +nan.0)                      @result{} #t
(real? +nan.0)                         @result{} #t
(rational? +nan.0)                     @result{} #f
(complex? +inf.0)                      @result{} #t
(real? -inf.0)                         @result{} #t
(rational? -inf.0)                     @result{} #f
(integer? -inf.0)                      @result{} #f
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Except for @func{number?}, the behavior of these type
predicates on inexact number objects is unreliable, because any
inaccuracy may affect the result.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {real-valued?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {rational-valued?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {integer-valued?} @var{obj}
These numerical type predicates can be applied to any kind of argument.
The @func{real-valued?} procedure returns @true{} if the object is a
number object and is equal in the sense of @code{=} to some real number
object, or if the object is a NaN, or a complex number object whose real
part is a NaN and whose imaginary part is zero in the sense of
@func{zero?}.  The @func{rational-valued?} and @func{integer-valued?}
procedures return @true{} if the object is a number object and is equal
in the sense of @code{=} to some object of the named type, and otherwise
they return @false{}.

@example
(real-valued? +nan.0)                  @result{} #t
(real-valued? +nan.0+0i)               @result{} #t
(real-valued? -inf.0)                  @result{} #t
(real-valued? 3)                       @result{} #t
(real-valued? -2.5+0.0i)               @result{} #t
(real-valued? -2.5+0i)                 @result{} #t
(real-valued? -2.5)                    @result{} #t
(real-valued? #e1e10)                  @result{} #t

(rational-valued? +nan.0)              @result{} #f
(rational-valued? -inf.0)              @result{} #f
(rational-valued? 6/10)                @result{} #t
(rational-valued? 6/10+0.0i)           @result{} #t
(rational-valued? 6/10+0i)             @result{} #t
(rational-valued? 6/3)                 @result{} #t

(integer-valued? 3+0i)                 @result{} #t
(integer-valued? 3+0.0i)               @result{} #t
(integer-valued? 3.0)                  @result{} #t
(integer-valued? 3.0+0.0i)             @result{} #t
(integer-valued? 8/4)                  @result{} #t
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} These procedures test whether a given number object can be
coerced to the specified type without loss of numerical accuracy.
Specifically, the behavior of these predicates differs from the behavior
of @func{real?}, @func{rational?}, and @func{integer?} on complex number
objects whose imaginary part is inexact zero.
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The behavior of these type predicates on inexact number
objects is unreliable, because any inaccuracy may affect the result.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {exact?} @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure {inexact?} @var{z}
These numerical predicates provide tests for the exactness of a
quantity.  For any number object, precisely one of these predicates is
true.

@example
(exact? 5)                   @result{} #t
(inexact? +inf.0)            @result{} #t
(inexact? +nan.0)            @result{} #t
@end example
@end deffn



@c page
@node baselib math ops exactness
@subsubsection Exactness conversion


These procedures implement the natural one--to-one correspondence
between exact and inexact integer objects throughout an
implementation--dependent range.  The @func{inexact} and @func{exact}
procedures are idempotent.


@deffn Procedure inexact @var{z}
The @func{inexact} procedure returns an inexact representation of
@var{z}.  If inexact number objects of the appropriate type have bounded
precision, then the value returned is an inexact number object that is
nearest to the argument.  If an exact argument has no reasonably close
inexact equivalent, an exception with condition type
@code{&implementation-violation} may be raised.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} For a real number object whose magnitude is finite but so
large that it has no reasonable finite approximation as an inexact
number, a reasonably close inexact equivalent may be @code{+inf.0} or
@code{-inf.0}.  Similarly, the inexact representation of a complex
number object whose components are finite may have infinite components.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure exact @var{z}
The @func{exact} procedure returns an exact representation of @var{z}.
The value returned is the exact number object that is numerically
closest to the argument; in most cases, the result of this procedure
should be numerically equal to its argument.  If an inexact argument has
no reasonably close exact equivalent, an exception with condition type
@code{&implementation-violation} may be raised.
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib math ops value pred
@subsubsection Value predicates


@deffn Procedure = @vari{z} @varii{z} @variii{z} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure < @vari{x} @varii{x} @variii{x} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure > @vari{x} @varii{x} @variii{x} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure <= @vari{x} @varii{x} @variii{x} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure >= @vari{x} @varii{x} @variii{x} @dots{}
These procedures return @true{} if their arguments are (respectively):
equal, monotonically increasing, monotonically decreasing, monotonically
nondecreasing, or monotonically nonincreasing, and @false{} otherwise.

Examples:

@example
(= +inf.0 +inf.0)               @result{} #t
(= -inf.0 +inf.0)               @result{} #f
(= -inf.0 -inf.0)               @result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
for any real number object @var{x} that is neither infinite nor NaN:

@example
(< -inf.0 @var{x} +inf.0)       @result{} #t
(> +inf.0 @var{x} -inf.0)       @result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
for any number object @var{z}:

@example
(= +nan.0 @var{z})              @result{} #f
@end example

For any real number object @var{x}:

@example
(< +nan.0 @var{x})              @result{} #f
(> +nan.0 @var{x})              @result{} #f
@end example

These predicates must be transitive.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The traditional implementations of these predicates in
Lisp--like languages are not transitive.
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note:} While it is possible to compare inexact number objects
using these predicates, the results may be unreliable because a small
inaccuracy may affect the result; this is especially true of @code{=}
and @func{zero?}  (below).

When in doubt, consult a numerical analyst.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {zero?} @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure {positive?} @var{x}
@deffnx Procedure {negative?} @var{x}
@deffnx Procedure {odd?} @var{n}
@deffnx Procedure {even?} @var{n}
@deffnx Procedure {finite?} @var{x}
@deffnx Procedure {infinite?} @var{x}
@deffnx Procedure {nan?} @var{x}
These numerical predicates test a number object for a particular
property, returning @true{} or @false{}.

@table @func
@item zero?
Tests if the number object is @code{=} to zero.

@item positive?
Tests whether it is greater than zero.

@item negative?
Tests whether it is less than zero.

@item odd?
Tests whether it is odd.

@item even?
Tests whether it is even.

@item finite?
Tests whether it is not an infinity and not a NaN.

@item infinite?
Tests whether it is an infinity.

@item nan?
Tests whether it is a NaN.
@end table

@example
(zero? +0.0)                  @result{} #t
(zero? -0.0)                  @result{} #t
(zero? +nan.0)                @result{} #f
(positive? +inf.0)            @result{} #t
(negative? -inf.0)            @result{} #t
(positive? +nan.0)            @result{} #f
(negative? +nan.0)            @result{} #f
(finite? +inf.0)              @result{} #f
(finite? 5)                   @result{} #t
(finite? 5.0)                 @result{} #t
(infinite? 5.0)               @result{} #f
(infinite? +inf.0)            @result{} #t
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} As with the predicates above, the results may be unreliable
because a small inaccuracy may affect the result.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib math ops comparison
@subsubsection Comparison


@deffn Procedure max @vari{x} @varii{x} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure min @vari{x} @varii{x} @dots{}
These procedures return the maximum or minimum of their arguments.

@example
(max 3 4)               @result{} 4
(max 3.9 4)             @result{} 4.0
@end example

For any real number object @var{x} that is not a NaN:

@example
(max +inf.0 @var{x})    @result{} +inf.0
(min -inf.0 @var{x})    @result{} -inf.0
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} If any argument is inexact, then the result is also inexact
(unless the procedure can prove that the inaccuracy is not large enough
to affect the result, which is possible only in unusual
implementations).  If @func{min} or @func{max} is used to compare number
objects of mixed exactness, and the numerical value of the result cannot
be represented as an inexact number object without loss of accuracy,
then the procedure may raise an exception with condition type
@code{&implementation-restriction}.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@c page
@node baselib math ops arithmetic
@subsubsection Arithmetic operations


@deffn Procedure + @vari{z} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure * @vari{z} @dots{}
These procedures return the sum or product of their arguments.

@example
(+ 3 4)                 @result{}  7
(+ 3)                   @result{}  3
(+)                     @result{}  0
(+ +inf.0 +inf.0)       @result{}  +inf.0
(+ +inf.0 -inf.0)       @result{}  +nan.0

(* 4)                   @result{}  4
(*)                     @result{}  1
(* 5 +inf.0)            @result{}  +inf.0
(* -5 +inf.0)           @result{}  -inf.0
(* +inf.0 +inf.0)       @result{}  +inf.0
(* +inf.0 -inf.0)       @result{}  -inf.0
(* 0 +inf.0)            @result{}  0 or +nan.0
(* 0 +nan.0)            @result{}  0 or +nan.0
(* 1.0 0)               @result{}  0 or 0.0
@end example

For any real number object @var{x} that is neither infinite nor NaN:

@example
(+ +inf.0 x)            @result{}  +inf.0
(+ -inf.0 x)            @result{}  -inf.0
@end example

For any real number object @var{x}:

@example
(+ +nan.0 x)            @result{}  +nan.0
@end example

For any real number object @var{x} that is not an exact 0:

@example
(* +nan.0 x)            @result{}  +nan.0
@end example

If any of these procedures are applied to mixed non--rational real and
non--real complex arguments, they either raise an exception with
condition type @code{&implementation-restriction} or return an
unspecified number object.

Implementations that distinguish @code{-0.0} should adopt behavior
consistent with the following examples:

@example
(+  0.0 -0.0)           @result{}  0.0
(+ -0.0  0.0)           @result{}  0.0
(+  0.0  0.0)           @result{}  0.0
(+ -0.0 -0.0)           @result{} -0.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure - @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure - @vari{z} @varii{z} @variii{z} @dots{}
With two or more arguments, this procedures returns the difference of
its arguments, associating to the left.  With one argument, however, it
returns the additive inverse of its argument.

@example
(- 3 4)                 @result{} -1
(- 3 4 5)               @result{} -6
(- 3)                   @result{} -3
(- +inf.0 +inf.0)       @result{} +nan.0
@end example

If this procedure is applied to mixed non--rational real and non--real
complex arguments, it either raises an exception with condition type
@code{&implementation-restriction} or returns an unspecified number
object.

Implementations that distinguish @math{-0.0} should adopt behavior
consistent with the following examples:

@example
(-  0.0)                @result{} -0.0
(- -0.0)                @result{}  0.0
(-  0.0 -0.0)           @result{}  0.0
(- -0.0  0.0)           @result{} -0.0
(-  0.0  0.0)           @result{}  0.0
(- -0.0 -0.0)           @result{}  0.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure / @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure / @vari{z} @varii{z} @variii{z} @dots{}
If all of the arguments are exact, then the divisors must all be
nonzero.  With two or more arguments, this procedure returns the
quotient of its arguments, associating to the left.  With one argument,
however, it returns the multiplicative inverse of its argument.

@example
(/ 3 4 5)               @result{} 3/20
(/ 3)                   @result{} 1/3
(/ 0.0)                 @result{} +inf.0
(/ 1.0 0)               @result{} +inf.0
(/ -1 0.0)              @result{} -inf.0
(/ +inf.0)              @result{} 0.0
(/ 0 0)                 @result{} exception &assertion
(/ 3 0)                 @result{} exception &assertion
(/ 0 3.5)               @result{} 0.0
(/ 0 0.0)               @result{} +nan.0
(/ 0.0 0)               @result{} +nan.0
(/ 0.0 0.0)             @result{} +nan.0
@end example

If this procedure is applied to mixed non--rational real and non--real
complex arguments, it either raises an exception with condition type
@code{&implementation-restriction} or returns an unspecified number
object.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure abs @var{x}
Returns the absolute value of its argument.

@example
(abs -7)                 @result{}  7
(abs -inf.0)             @result{}  +inf.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure div-and-mod @vari{x} @varii{x}
@deffnx Procedure div @vari{x} @varii{x}
@deffnx Procedure mod @vari{x} @varii{x}
@deffnx Procedure div0-and-mod0 @vari{x} @varii{x}
@deffnx Procedure div0 @vari{x} @varii{x}
@deffnx Procedure mod0 @vari{x} @varii{x}
These procedures implement number--theoretic integer division and return
the results of the corresponding mathematical operations specified in
@ref{baselib math semantics integer}.  If @vari{x} and @varii{x} are
exact, @varii{x} must be nonzero.  In the cases where the mathematical
requirements in @ref{baselib math semantics integer} cannot be satisfied
by any number object, either an exception is raised with condition type
@code{&implementation-restriction}, or unspecified number objects (one
for for @func{div}, @func{mod}, @func{div0} and @func{mod0}, two for
@func{div-and-mod} and @func{div0-and-mod0}) are returned.

@example
(div x1 x2)        @result{} x1 div x2
(mod x1 x2)        @result{} x1 mod x2

(div-and-mod x1 x2)
@result{} x1 div x2,
   x1 mod x2 ;; two return values

(div0 x1 x2)       @result{} x1 div_0 x2
(mod0 x1 x2)       @result{} x1 mod_0 x2

(div0-and-mod0 x1 x2)
@result{} x1 div_0 x2,
   x1 mod_0 x2 ;; two return values
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure gcd @vari{n} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure lcm @vari{n} @dots{}
These procedures return the greatest common divisor or least common
multiple of their arguments.  The result is always non--negative.

@example
(gcd 32 -36)                    @result{} 4
(gcd)                           @result{} 0
(lcm 32 -36)                    @result{} 288
(lcm 32.0 -36)                  @result{} 288.0
(lcm)                           @result{} 1
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib math ops part
@subsubsection Part separation


@deffn Procedure numerator @var{q}
@deffnx Procedure denominator @var{q}
These procedures return the numerator or denominator of their argument;
the result is computed as if the argument was represented as a fraction
in lowest terms.  The denominator is always positive.  The denominator
of @code{0} is defined to be @code{1}.

@example
(numerator   (/ 6 4))           @result{} 3
(denominator (/ 6 4))           @result{} 2
(denominator (inexact (/ 6 4))) @result{} 2.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure floor @var{x}
@deffnx Procedure ceiling @var{x}
@deffnx Procedure truncate @var{x}
@deffnx Procedure round @var{x}
These procedures return inexact integer objects for inexact arguments
that are not infinities or NaNs, and exact integer objects for exact
rational arguments.

@table @func
@item floor
Returns the largest integer object not larger than @var{x}.

@item ceiling
Returns the smallest integer object not smaller than @var{x}.

@item truncate
Returns the integer object closest to @var{x} whose absolute value is
not larger than the absolute value of @var{x}.

@item round
Returns the closest integer object to @var{x}, rounding to even when
@var{x} represents a number halfway between two integers (this conforms
to @ieee{} 754 round to nearest mode).
@end table

If the argument to one of these procedures is inexact, then the result
is also inexact.  If an exact value is needed, the result should be
passed to the @func{exact} procedure.

Although infinities and NaNs are not integer objects, these procedures
return an infinity when given an infinity as an argument, and a NaN when
given a NaN.

@example
(floor -4.3)            @result{} -5.0
(ceiling -4.3)          @result{} -4.0
(truncate -4.3)         @result{} -4.0
(round -4.3)            @result{} -4.0

(floor 3.5)             @result{} 3.0
(ceiling 3.5)           @result{} 4.0
(truncate 3.5)          @result{} 3.0
(round 3.5)             @result{} 4.0

(round 7/2)             @result{} 4
(round 7)               @result{} 7

(floor +inf.0)          @result{} +inf.0
(ceiling -inf.0)        @result{} -inf.0
(round +nan.0)          @result{} +nan.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure rationalize @vari{x} @varii{x}
The @func{rationalize} procedure returns a number object representing
the @emph{simplest} rational number differing from @vari{x} by no more
than @varii{x}.

A rational number @math{r_1} is @emph{simpler} than another rational
number @math{r_2} if @math{r_1 = p_1/q_1} and @math{r_2 = p_2/q_2} (in
lowest terms) and @math{|p_1| <= |p_2|} and @math{|q_1| <= |q_2|}.  Thus
@math{3/5} is simpler than @math{4/7}.

Although not all rationals are comparable in this ordering (consider
@math{2/7} and @math{3/5}) any interval contains a rational number that
is simpler than every other rational number in that interval (the
simpler @math{2/5} lies between @math{2/7} and @math{3/5}).

Note that @math{0 = 0/1} is the simplest rational of all.

@example
(rationalize (exact .3) 1/10)   @result{} 1/3
(rationalize .3 1/10)           @result{} #i1/3 ; approximately

(rationalize +inf.0 3)          @result{} +inf.0
(rationalize +inf.0 +inf.0)     @result{} +nan.0
(rationalize 3 +inf.0)          @result{} 0.0
@end example

The first two examples hold only in implementations whose inexact real
number objects have sufficient precision.
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib math ops trascend
@subsubsection Trascendental functions


@deffn Procedure exp @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure log @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure log @vari{z} @varii{z}
@deffnx Procedure sin @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure cos @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure tan @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure asin @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure acos @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure atan @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure atan @vari{x} @varii{x}
These procedures compute the usual transcendental functions.

The @func{exp} procedure computes the base--@var{e} exponential of
@var{z}.

The @func{log} procedure with a single argument computes the natural
logarithm of @var{z} (@strong{not} the base--10 logarithm); @code{(log
@vari{z} @varii{z})} computes the base--@varii{z} logarithm of @vari{z}.

The @func{asin}, @func{acos}, and @func{atan} procedures compute
arcsine, arccosine, and arctangent, respectively.  The two--argument
variant of @func{atan} computes:

@example
(angle (make-rectangular @varii{x} @vari{x}))
@end example

These procedures may return inexact results even when given exact
arguments.

@example
(exp +inf.0)    @result{} +inf.0
(exp -inf.0)    @result{} 0.0
(log +inf.0)    @result{} +inf.0
(log 0.0)       @result{} -inf.0
(log 0)         @result{} exception &assertion

(log -inf.0)    @result{} +inf.0+3.141592653589793i
                ; approximately

(atan -inf.0)   @result{} -1.5707963267948965
                ; approximately

(atan +inf.0)   @result{} 1.5707963267948965
                ; approximately

(log -1.0+0.0i) @result{} 0.0+3.141592653589793i
                ; approximately

(log -1.0-0.0i) @result{} 0.0-3.141592653589793i
                ; approximately if -0.0 is distinguished
@end example
@end deffn



@c page
@node baselib math ops exponentiation
@subsubsection Exponentiation functions


@deffn Procedure sqrt @var{z}
Return the principal square root of @var{z}.  For rational @var{z}, the
result has either positive real part, or zero real part and
non--negative imaginary part.  With @math{\log} defined as in
@ref{baselib math semantics trascend}, the value of @code{(sqrt
@var{z})} could be expressed as @math{e^((\log z)/2)}.

The @func{sqrt} procedure may return an inexact result even when given
an exact argument.

@example
(sqrt -5)               @result{} 0.0+2.23606797749979i
                        ; approximately
(sqrt +inf.0)           @result{} +inf.0
(sqrt -inf.0)           @result{} +inf.0i
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure exact-integer-sqrt @var{k}
The @func{exact-integer-sqrt} procedure returns two non--negative exact
integer objects @math{s} and @math{r} where @math{@var{k} = s^2 + r} and
@math{@var{k} < (s+1)^2}.

@example
(exact-integer-sqrt 4)  @result{} 2 0 ; two return values
(exact-integer-sqrt 5)  @result{} 2 1 ; two return values
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure expt @vari{z} @varii{z}
Return @vari{z} raised to the power @varii{z}.  For non--zero @vari{z},
this is @math{e^(z_2 \log z_1)}.  @math{0.0^z} is @math{1.0} if
@math{@var{z} = 0.0}, and @math{0.0} if @code{(real-part @var{z})} is
positive.  For other cases in which the first argument is zero, either
an exception is raised with condition type
@code{&implementation-restriction}, or an unspecified number object is
returned.

For an exact real number object @vari{z} and an exact integer object
@varii{z}, @code{(expt @vari{z} @varii{z})} must return an exact result.
For all other values of @vari{z} and @varii{z}, @code{(expt @vari{z}
@varii{z})} may return an inexact result, even when both @vari{z} and
@varii{z} are exact.

@example
(expt 5 3)                  @result{} 125
(expt 5 -3)                 @result{} 1/125
(expt 5 0)                  @result{} 1
(expt 0 5)                  @result{} 0
(expt 0 5+.0000312i)        @result{} 0.0
(expt 0 -5)                 @result{} unspecified
(expt 0 -5+.0000312i)       @result{} unspecified
(expt 0 0)                  @result{} 1
(expt 0.0 0.0)              @result{} 1.0
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib math ops complex
@subsubsection Complex numbers functions


@deffn Procedure make-rectangular @vari{x} @varii{x}
@deffnx Procedure make-polar @variii{x} @variv{x}
@deffnx Procedure real-part @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure imag-part @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure magnitude @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure angle @var{z}
Suppose @math{a_1}, @math{a_2}, @math{a_3}, and @math{a_4} are real
numbers, and @math{c} is a complex number such that the following holds:

@example
c = a_1 + a_2 i = a_3 e^(i a_4)
@end example

Then, if @vari{x}, @varii{x}, @variii{x}, and @variv{x} are number
objects representing @math{a_1}, @math{a_2}, @math{a_3}, and @math{a_4},
respectively, @code{(make-rectangular @vari{x} @varii{x})} returns
@math{c}, and @code{(make-polar @variii{x} @variv{x})} returns @math{c}.

@example
(make-rectangular 1.1 2.2)    @result{} 1.1+2.2i ; approximately
(make-polar 1.1 2.2)          @result{} 1.1@@2.2 ; approximately
@end example

Conversely, if @math{-\pi <= a_4 <= \pi}, and if @math{z} is a number
object representing @math{c}, then @code{(real-part @var{z})} returns
@math{a_1}, @code{(imag-part @var{z})} returns @math{a_2},
@code{(magnitude @var{z})} returns @math{a_3}, and @code{(angle
@var{z})} returns @math{a_4}.

@example
(real-part 1.1+2.2i)    @result{} 1.1
                        ; approximately
(imag-part 1.1+2.2i)    @result{} 2.2
                        ; approximately
(magnitude 1.1@@2.2)     @result{} 1.1
                        ; approximately
(angle     1.1@@2.2)     @result{} 2.2
                        ; approximately

(angle -1.0)            @result{} 3.141592653589793
                        ; approximately
(angle -1.0+0.0i)       @result{} 3.141592653589793
                        ; approximately
(angle -1.0-0.0i)       @result{} -3.141592653589793
                        ; approximately if -0.0 is distinguished
(angle +inf.0)          @result{} 0.0
(angle -inf.0)          @result{} 3.141592653589793
                        ; approximately
@end example

Moreover, suppose @vari{x}, @varii{x} are such that either @vari{x} or
@varii{x} is an infinity, then

@example
(make-rectangular x1 x2)        @result{} @var{z}
(magnitude z)                   @result{} +inf.0
@end example

The @func{make-polar}, @func{magnitude}, and @func{angle} procedures may
return inexact results even when given exact arguments.

@example
(angle -1)              @result{} 3.141592653589793
                        ; approximately
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node baselib math string
@subsection Numerical Input and Output


@deffn Procedure {number->string} @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure {number->string} @var{z} @var{radix}
@deffnx Procedure {number->string} @var{z} @var{radix} @var{precision}
The @func{number->string} procedure takes a number object and a radix
and returns as a string an external representation of the given number
object in the given radix such that:

@example
(let ((number @var{z})
      (radix  @var{radix}))
  (eqv?
    (string->number (number->string number radix) radix)
    number))
@end example

@noindent
is true.  If no possible result makes this expression true, an exception
with condition type @code{&implementation-restriction} is raised.

@var{radix} must be an exact integer object, either @math{2}, @math{8},
@math{10}, or @math{16}.  If omitted, @var{radix} defaults to @math{10}.
If a @var{precision} is specified, then @var{z} must be an inexact
complex number object, @var{precision} must be an exact positive integer
object, and @var{radix} must be @math{10}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The error case can occur only when @var{z} is not a complex
number object or is a complex number object with a non--rational real or
imaginary part.
@end quotation

If a @var{precision} is specified, then the representations of the
inexact real components of the result, unless they are infinite or NaN,
specify an explicit @meta{mantissa width} @math{p}, and @math{p} is the
least @math{p >= @var{precision}} for which the above expression is
true.

If @var{z} is inexact, the radix is @math{10}, and the above expression
and condition can be satisfied by a result that contains a decimal
point, then the result contains a decimal point and is expressed using
the minimum number of digits (exclusive of exponent, trailing zeroes,
and mantissa width) needed to make the above expression and condition
true; otherwise the format of the result is unspecified.

The result returned by @func{number->string} never contains an explicit
radix prefix.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {string->number} @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure {string->number} @var{string} @var{radix}
Return a number object with maximally precise representation expressed
by the given @var{string}.

@var{radix} must be an exact integer object, either @math{2}, @math{8},
@math{10}, or @math{16}.  If supplied, @var{radix} is a default radix
that may be overridden by an explicit radix prefix in @var{string}
(e.g. @code{#o177}).  If @var{radix} is not supplied, then the default
radix is @math{10}.

If @var{string} is not a syntactically valid notation for a number
object or a notation for a rational number object with a zero
denominator, then @func{string->number} returns @false{}.

@example
(string->number "100")          @result{} 100
(string->number "100" 16)       @result{} 256
(string->number "1e2")          @result{} 100.0
(string->number "0/0")          @result{} #f
(string->number "+inf.0")       @result{} +inf.0
(string->number "-inf.0")       @result{} -inf.0
(string->number "+nan.0")       @result{} +nan.0
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The @func{string->number} procedure always returns a number
object or @false{}; it never raises an exception.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@c page
@node baselib booleans
@section Booleans


The standard boolean objects for true and false have external
representations @true{} and @false{}.  However, of all objects, only
@false{} counts as false in conditional expressions.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Programmers accustomed to other dialects of Lisp should be
aware that Scheme distinguishes both @false{} and the empty list from
each other and from the symbol @code{nil}.
@end quotation


@deffn Procedure not @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is @false{}, or @false{} otherwise.

@example
(not #t)         @result{} #f
(not 3)          @result{} #f
(not (list 3))   @result{} #f
(not #f)         @result{} #t
(not '())        @result{} #f
(not (list))     @result{} #f
(not 'nil)       @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {boolean?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is either @true{} or @false{}, or @false{}
otherwise.

@example
(boolean? #f)   @result{} #t
(boolean? 0)    @result{} #f
(boolean? '())  @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {boolean=?} @vari{bool} @varii{bool} @variii{bool} @dots{}
Return @true{} if the booleans are the same.
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib lists
@section Pairs and lists


A @emph{pair} is a compound structure with two fields called the car and
cdr fields (for historical reasons).  Pairs are created by the procedure
@func{cons}.  The car and cdr fields are accessed by the procedures
@func{car} and @func{cdr}.

Pairs are used primarily to represent lists.  A list can be defined
recursively as either the empty list or a pair whose cdr is a list.
More precisely, the set of lists is defined as the smallest set @var{X}
such that:

@itemize
@item
The empty list is in @var{X}.

@item
If @var{list} is in @var{X}, then any pair whose cdr field contains
@var{list} is also in @var{X}.
@end itemize

The objects in the car fields of successive pairs of a list are the
elements of the list.  For example, a two--element list is a pair whose
car is the first element and whose cdr is a pair whose car is the second
element and whose cdr is the empty list.  The length of a list is the
number of elements, which is the same as the number of pairs.

The empty list is a special object of its own type.  It is not a pair.
It has no elements and its length is zero.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The above definitions imply that all lists have finite
length and are terminated by the empty list.
@end quotation

A chain of pairs not ending in the empty list is called an
@emph{improper list}.  Note that an improper list is not a list.  The
list and dotted notations can be combined to represent improper lists:

@example
(a b c . d)
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to

@example
(a . (b . (c . d)))
@end example

Whether a given pair is a list depends upon what is stored in the cdr
field.


@deffn Procedure {pair?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a pair, @false{} otherwise.

@example
(pair? '(a . b))        @result{} #t
(pair? '(a b c))        @result{} #t
(pair? '())             @result{} #f
(pair? '#(a b))         @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure cons @vari{obj} @varii{obj}
Return a newly allocated pair whose car is @vari{obj} and whose cdr is
@varii{obj}.  The pair is guaranteed to be different (in the sense of
@func{eqv?}) from every existing object.

@example
(cons 'a '())           @result{}  (a)
(cons '(a) '(b c d))    @result{}  ((a) b c d)
(cons "a" '(b c))       @result{}  ("a" b c)
(cons 'a 3)             @result{}  (a . 3)
(cons '(a b) 'c)        @result{}  ((a b) . c)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure car @var{pair}
Return the contents of the car field of @var{pair}.

@example
(car '(a b c))          @result{} a
(car '((a) b c d))      @result{} (a)
(car '(1 . 2))          @result{} 1
(car '())               @result{} exception &assertion
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure cdr @var{pair}
Return the contents of the cdr field of @var{pair}.

@example
(cdr '((a) b c d))      @result{} (b c d)
(cdr '(1 . 2))          @result{} 2
(cdr '())               @result{} exception &assertion
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure caar @var{pair}
@deffnx Procedure cadr @var{pair}
@deffnx Procedure ...
@deffnx Procedure cdddar @var{pair}
@deffnx Procedure cddddr @var{pair}
These procedures are compositions of @func{car} and @func{cdr}, where
for example @func{caddr} could be defined by

@example
(define caddr (lambda (x) (car (cdr (cdr x)))))
@end example

Arbitrary compositions, up to four deep, are provided.  There are
twenty--eight of these procedures in all.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {null?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is the empty list, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {list?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a list, @false{} otherwise.  By
definition, all lists are chains of pairs that have finite length and
are terminated by the empty list.

@example
(list? '(a b c))     @result{} #t
(list? '())          @result{} #t
(list? '(a . b))     @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure list @var{obj} @dots{}
Return a newly allocated list of its arguments.

@example
(list 'a (+ 3 4) 'c)    @result{} (a 7 c)
(list)                  @result{} ()
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure length @var{list}
Return the length of @var{list}.

@example
(length '(a b c))               @result{}  3
(length '(a (b) (c d e)))       @result{}  3
(length '())                    @result{}  0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure append
@deffnx Procedure append @var{list} @dots{} @var{obj}
Return a possibly improper list consisting of the elements of the first
@var{list} followed by the elements of the other @var{list}s, with
@var{obj} as the cdr of the final pair.  An improper list results if
@var{obj} is not a list.

@example
(append '(x) '(y))              @result{}  (x y)
(append '(a) '(b c d))          @result{}  (a b c d)
(append '(a (b)) '((c)))        @result{}  (a (b) (c))
(append '(a b) '(c . d))        @result{}  (a b c . d)
(append '() 'a)                 @result{}  a
@end example

If @func{append} constructs a non--empty chain of pairs, it is always
newly allocated.  If no pairs are allocated, @var{obj} is returned.

@quotation
@rnrs{6} mandates that this function requires at least the argument
@var{obj}; it is illegal to call this function with no arguments.
Despite this: The Scheme implementations supported by Nausicaa (Larceny,
Ikarus, Mosh, Ypsilon) allow calling this function with no arguments, in
which case the return value is the empty string.  The @library{nausicaa}
language will ensure this behaviour.  (Fri Jun 5, 2009)
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure reverse @var{list}
Return a newly allocated list consisting of the elements of @var{list}
in reverse order.

@example
(reverse '(a b c))              @result{} (c b a)
(reverse '(a (b c) d (e (f))))  @result{} ((e (f)) d (b c) a)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure list-tail @var{list} @var{k}
@var{list} should be a list of size at least @var{k}.  Return the
subchain of pairs of @var{list} obtained by omitting the first @var{k}
elements.

@example
(list-tail '(a b c d) 2)        @result{}  (c d)
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
that @var{list} is a chain of pairs whose length is at least @var{k}.
It should not check that it is a chain of pairs beyond this length.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure list-ref @var{list} @var{k}
@var{list} must be a list whose length is at least @emph{@var{k} + 1}.
The @func{list-tail} procedure returns the @var{k}th element of
@var{list}.

@example
(list-ref '(a b c d) 2)         @result{} c
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
that @var{list} is a chain of pairs whose length is at least
@emph{@var{k} + 1}.  It should not check that it is a list of pairs
beyond this length.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure map @var{proc} @vari{list} @varii{list} @dots{}
The @var{list}s should all have the same length.  @var{proc} should
accept as many arguments as there are @var{list}s and return a single
value.  @var{proc} should not mutate any of the @var{list}s.

The @func{map} procedure applies @var{proc} element--wise to the
elements of the @var{list}s and returns a list of the results, in order.
@var{proc} is always called in the same dynamic environment as
@func{map} itself.  The order in which @var{proc} is applied to the
elements of the @var{list}s is unspecified.  If multiple returns occur
from @func{map}, the values returned by earlier returns are not mutated.

@example
(map cadr '((a b) (d e) (g h)))         @result{}  (b e h)

(map (lambda (n) (expt n n))
     '(1 2 3 4 5))                      @result{}  (1 4 27 256 3125)

(map + '(1 2 3) '(4 5 6))               @result{}  (5 7 9)

(let ((count 0))
  (map (lambda (ignored)
         (set! count (+ count 1))
         count)
       '(a b)))                         @result{}  (1 2) or (2 1)
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation should
check that the @var{list}s all have the same length.  The implementation
must check the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by
applying it as described.  An implementation may check whether
@var{proc} is an appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure for-each @var{proc} @vari{list} @varii{list} @dots{}
The @var{list}s should all have the same length.  @var{proc} should
accept as many arguments as there are @var{list}s.  @var{proc} should
not mutate any of the @var{list}s.

The @func{for-each} procedure applies @var{proc} element--wise to the
elements of the @var{list}s for its side effects, in order from the
first elements to the last.  @var{proc} is always called in the same
dynamic environment as @func{for-each} itself.  The return values of
@func{for-each} are unspecified.

@example
(let ((v (make-vector 5)))
  (for-each (lambda (i)
              (vector-set! v i (* i i)))
            '(0 1 2 3 4))
  v)
@result{}  #(0 1 4 9 16)

(for-each (lambda (x) x) '(1 2 3 4))
@result{} unspecified

(for-each even? '())
@result{} unspecified
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation should
check that the @var{list}s all have the same length.  The implementation
must check the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by
applying it as described.  An implementation may check whether
@var{proc} is an appropriate argument before applying it.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Implementations of @code{for-each} may or may not
tail--call @var{proc} on the last elements.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib symbols
@section Symbols


Symbols are objects whose usefulness rests on the fact that two symbols
are identical (in the sense of @func{eq?}, @func{eqv?} and
@func{equal?}) if and only if their names are spelled the same way.  A
symbol literal is formed using @func{quote}.


@deffn Procedure {symbol?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a symbol, @false{} otherwise.

@example
(symbol? 'foo)          @result{} #t
(symbol? (car '(a b)))  @result{} #t
(symbol? "bar")         @result{} #f
(symbol? 'nil)          @result{} #t
(symbol? '())           @result{} #f
(symbol? #f)            @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {symbol->string} @var{symbol}
Return the name of @var{symbol} as an immutable string.

@example
(symbol->string 'flying-fish)                   @result{}  "flying-fish"
(symbol->string 'Martin)                        @result{}  "Martin"
(symbol->string (string->symbol "Malvina"))     @result{}  "Malvina"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {symbol=?} @vari{symbol} @varii{symbol} @variii{symbol} @dots{}
Return @true{} if the symbols are the same, i.e., if their names are
spelled the same.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {string->symbol} @var{string}
Return the symbol whose name is @var{string}.

@example
(eq? 'mISSISSIppi 'mississippi)
@result{} #f

(string->symbol "mISSISSIppi")
@result{} the symbol with name "mISSISSIppi"

(eq? 'bitBlt (string->symbol "bitBlt"))
@result{} #t

(eq? 'JollyWog (string->symbol (symbol->string 'JollyWog)))
@result{} #t

(string=? "K. Harper, M.D."
          (symbol->string (string->symbol "K. Harper, M.D.")))
@result{} #t
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib characters
@section Characters


The @dfn{characters} are objects that represent Unicode scalar values.

@quotation
Unicode defines a standard mapping between sequences of @emph{Unicode
scalar values} (integers in the range @math{0} to @code{#x10FFFF},
excluding the range @code{#xD800} to @code{#xDFFF}) in the latest
version of the standard and human--readable ``characters''.

More precisely, Unicode distinguishes between glyphs, which are printed
for humans to read, and characters, which are abstract entities that map
to glyphs (sometimes in a way that's sensitive to surrounding
characters).  Furthermore, different sequences of scalar values
sometimes correspond to the same character.  The relationships among
scalar, characters, and glyphs are subtle and complex.

Despite this complexity, most things that a literate human would call a
``character'' can be represented by a single Unicode scalar value
(although several sequences of Unicode scalar values may represent that
same character).  For example, Roman letters, Cyrillic letters, Hebrew
consonants, and most Chinese characters fall into this category.

Unicode scalar values exclude the range @code{#xD800} to @code{#xDFFF},
which are part of the range of Unicode @emph{code points}.  However, the
Unicode code points in this range, the so--called @emph{surrogates}, are
an artifact of the @utf{}--16 encoding, and can only appear in specific
Unicode encodings, and even then only in pairs that encode scalar
values.  Consequently, all characters represent code points, but the
surrogate code points do not have representations as characters.
@end quotation


@deffn Procedure {char?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a character, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {char->integer} @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure {integer->char} @var{sv}
@var{sv} must be a Unicode scalar value, i.e., a non--negative exact
integer object in @code{[0, #xD7FF] union [#xE000, #x10FFFF]}.

Given a character, @func{char->integer} returns its Unicode scalar value
as an exact integer object.  For a Unicode scalar value @var{sv},
@func{integer->char} returns its associated character.

@example
(integer->char 32)                      @result{} #\space
(char->integer (integer->char 5000))    @result{} 5000
(integer->char #\xD800)                 @result{} exception &assertion
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {char=?} @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {char<?} @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {char>?} @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {char<=?} @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {char>=?} @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
These procedures impose a total ordering on the set of characters
according to their Unicode scalar values.

@example
@c (char<? #\z #\\ss)      @result{} #t
(char<? #\z #\Z)                @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib strings
@section Strings


Strings are sequences of characters.  The @emph{length} of a string is
the number of characters that it contains.  This number is fixed when
the string is created.  The @emph{valid indices} of a string are the
integers less than the length of the string.  The first character of a
string has index 0, the second has index 1, and so on.


@deffn Procedure {string?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a string, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-string @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure make-string @var{k} @var{char}
Return a newly allocated string of length @var{k}.  If @var{char} is
given, then all elements of the string are initialized to @var{char},
otherwise the contents of the @var{string} are unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string @var{char} @dots{}
Return a newly allocated string composed of the arguments.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-length @var{string}
Return the number of characters in the given @var{string} as an exact
integer object.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-ref @var{string} @var{k}
@var{k} must be a valid index of @var{string}.  The @func{string-ref}
procedure returns character @var{k} of @var{string} using zero--origin
indexing.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Implementors should make @func{string-ref} run in constant
time.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {string=?} @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
Return @true{} if the strings are the same length and contain the same
characters in the same positions.  Otherwise, the @func{string=?}
procedure returns @false{}.

@example
(string=? "Strause" "Strasse")    @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {string<?} @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {string>?} @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {string<=?} @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {string>=?} @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
These procedures are the lexicographic extensions to strings of the
corresponding orderings on characters.  For example, @func{string<?} is
the lexicographic ordering on strings induced by the ordering
@func{char<?} on characters.  If two strings differ in length but are
the same up to the length of the shorter string, the shorter string is
considered to be lexicographically less than the longer string.

@example
(string<? "z" "a")      @result{} #t
(string<? "z" "zz")     @result{} #t
(string<? "z" "Z")      @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure substring @var{string} @var{start} @var{end}
@var{string} must be a string, and @var{start} and @var{end} must be
exact integer objects satisfying:

@example
0 <= @var{start} <= @var{end} <= (string-length @var{string})
@end example

The @func{substring} procedure returns a newly allocated string formed
from the characters of @var{string} beginning with index @var{start}
(inclusive) and ending with index @var{end} (exclusive).
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-append @var{string} @dots{}
Return a newly allocated string whose characters form the concatenation
of the given strings.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string->list @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure list->string @var{list}
@var{list} must be a list of characters.

The @func{string->list} procedure returns a newly allocated list of the
characters that make up the given string.

The @func{list->string} procedure returns a newly allocated string
formed from the characters in @var{list}.

The @func{string->list} and @func{list->string} procedures are inverses
so far as @func{equal?} is concerned.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-for-each @var{proc} @vari{string} @varii{string} @dots{}
The @var{string}s must all have the same length.  @var{proc} should
accept as many arguments as there are @var{string}s.

The @func{string-for-each} procedure applies @var{proc} element--wise to
the characters of the @var{string}s for its side effects, in order from
the first characters to the last.  @var{proc} is always called in the
same dynamic environment as @func{string-for-each} itself.  The return
values of @func{string-for-each} are unspecified.

Analogous to @func{for-each}.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying it as
described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-copy @var{string}
Return a newly allocated copy of the given @var{string}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib vectors
@section Vectors


Vectors are heterogeneous structures whose elements are indexed by
integers.  A vector typically occupies less space than a list of the
same length, and the average time needed to access a randomly chosen
element is typically less for the vector than for the list.

The @emph{length} of a vector is the number of elements that it
contains.  This number is a non--negative integer that is fixed when the
vector is created.  The @emph{valid indices} of a vector are the exact
non--negative integer objects less than the length of the vector.  The
first element in a vector is indexed by zero, and the last element is
indexed by one less than the length of the vector.

Like list constants, vector constants must be quoted:

@example
'#(0 (2 2 2 2) "Anna")     @result{}  #(0 (2 2 2 2) "Anna")
@end example


@deffn Procedure vector? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a vector, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-vector @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure make-vector @var{k} @var{fill}
Return a newly allocated vector of @var{k} elements.  If a second
argument is given, then each element is initialized to @var{fill}.
Otherwise the initial contents of each element is unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure vector @var{obj} @dots{}
Return a newly allocated vector whose elements contain the given
arguments.  Analogous to @code{list}.

@example
(vector 'a 'b 'c)               @result{}  #(a b c)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure vector-length @var{vector}
Return the number of elements in @var{vector} as an exact integer
object.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure vector-ref @var{vector} @var{k}
@var{k} must be a valid index of @var{vector}.  The @func{vector-ref}
procedure returns the contents of element @var{k} of @var{vector}.

@example
(vector-ref '#(1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21) 5)     @result{}  8
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure vector-set! @var{vector} @var{k} @var{obj}
@var{k} must be a valid index of @var{vector}.  The @func{vector-set!}
procedure stores @var{obj} in element @var{k} of @var{vector}, and
returns unspecified.

Passing an immutable vector to @func{vector-set!} should cause an
exception with condition type @code{&assertion} to be raised.

@example
(let ((vec (vector 0 '(2 2 2 2) "Anna")))
  (vector-set! vec 1 '("Sue" "Sue"))
  vec)
@result{}  #(0 ("Sue" "Sue") "Anna")

(vector-set! '#(0 1 2) 1 "doe")
@result{}  unspecified
    ;; constant vector
    ;; should raise exception &assertion
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure vector->list @var{vector}
@deffnx Procedure list->vector @var{list}
The @func{vector->list} procedure returns a newly allocated list of the
objects contained in the elements of @var{vector}.

The @func{list->vector} procedure returns a newly created vector
initialized to the elements of the list @var{list}.

@example
(vector->list '#(dah dah didah))        @result{} (dah dah didah)
(list->vector '(dididit dah))           @result{} #(dididit dah)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {vector-fill!} @var{vector fill}
Store @var{fill} in every element of @var{vector} and returns
unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure vector-map @var{proc} @vari{vector} @varii{vector} @dots{}
The @var{vector}s must all have the same length.  @var{proc} should
accept as many arguments as there are @var{vector}s and return a single
value.

The @func{vector-map} procedure applies @var{proc} element--wise to the
elements of the @var{vector}s and returns a vector of the results, in
order.  @var{proc} is always called in the same dynamic environment as
@func{vector-map} itself.  The order in which @var{proc} is applied to
the elements of the @var{vector}s is unspecified.  If multiple returns
occur from @func{vector-map}, the return values returned by earlier
returns are not mutated.

Analogous to @func{map}.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying it as
described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure vector-for-each @var{proc} @vari{vector} @varii{vector} @dots{}
The @var{vector}s must all have the same length.  @var{proc} should
accept as many arguments as there are @var{vector}s.  The
@code{vector-for-each} procedure applies @var{proc} element--wise to the
elements of the @var{vector}s for its side effects, in order from the
first elements to the last.  @var{proc} is always called in the same
dynamic environment as @func{vector-for-each} itself.  The return values
of @func{vector-for-each} are unspecified.

Analogous to @func{for-each}.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying it as
described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib errors
@section Errors and violations


@deffn Procedure error @var{who} @var{message} @vari{irritant} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure assertion-violation @var{who} @var{message} @vari{irritant} @dots{}
@var{who} must be a string or a symbol or @false{}.  @var{message} must
be a string.  The @var{irritant}s are arbitrary objects.

These procedures raise an exception.  The @func{error} procedure should
be called when an error has occurred, typically caused by something that
has gone wrong in the interaction of the program with the external world
or the user.  The @func{assertion-violation} procedure should be called
when an invalid call to a procedure was made, either passing an invalid
number of arguments, or passing an argument that it is not specified to
handle.

The @var{who} argument should describe the procedure or operation that
detected the exception.  The @var{message} argument should describe the
exceptional situation.  The @var{irritant}s should be the arguments to
the operation that detected the operation.

The condition object provided with the exception has the following
condition types:

@itemize
@item
If @var{who} is not @false{}, the condition has condition type
@code{&who}, with @var{who} as the value of its field.  In that case,
@var{who} should be the name of the procedure or entity that detected
the exception.  If it is @false{}, the condition does not have condition
type @code{&who}.

@item
The condition has condition type @code{&message}, with @var{message} as
the value of its field.

@item
The condition has condition type @code{&irritants}, and its field has as
its value a list of the @var{irritant}s.
@end itemize

Moreover, the condition created by @func{error} has condition type
@code{&error}, and the condition created by @func{assertion-violation}
has condition type @code{&assertion}.

@example
(define (fac n)
  (if (not (integer-valued? n))
      (assertion-violation
       'fac "non-integral argument" n))
  (if (negative? n)
      (assertion-violation
       'fac "negative argument" n))
  (letrec
    ((loop (lambda (n r)
             (if (zero? n)
                 r
                 (loop (- n 1) (* r n))))))
      (loop n 1)))

(fac 5)         @result{} 120
(fac 4.5)       @result{} exception &assertion
(fac -3)        @result{} exception &assertion
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax assert @meta{expression}
An @func{assert} form is evaluated by evaluating @meta{expression}.  If
@meta{expression} returns a true value, that value is returned from the
@func{assert} expression.  If @meta{expression} returns @false{}, an
exception with condition types @code{&assertion} and @code{&message} is
raised.  The message provided in the condition object is
implementation--dependent.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Implementations should exploit the fact that @func{assert}
is syntax to provide as much information as possible about the location
of the assertion failure.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib control
@section Control features


This chapter describes various primitive procedures which control the
flow of program execution in special ways.


@deffn Procedure apply @var{proc} @vari{arg} @dots{} @var{rest-args}
@var{rest-args} must be a list.  @var{proc} should accept @emph{n}
arguments, where @emph{n} is number of @var{arg}s plus the length of
@var{rest-args}.  The @func{apply} procedure calls @var{proc} with the
elements of the list:

@example
(append (list @vari{arg} @dots{}) @var{rest-args})
@end example

@noindent
as the actual arguments.

If a call to @func{apply} occurs in a tail context, the call to
@var{proc} is also in a tail context.

@example
(apply + (list 3 4))                    @result{}  7

(define compose
  (lambda (f g)
    (lambda args
      (f (apply g args)))))

((compose sqrt *) 12 75)                @result{}  30
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure call-with-current-continuation @var{proc}
@deffnx Procedure call/cc @var{proc}
@var{proc} should accept one argument.  The procedure @func{call/cc}
(which is the same as the procedure
@func{call-with-current-continuation}) packages the current continuation
as an ``escape procedure'' and passes it as an argument to @var{proc}.

The escape procedure is a Scheme procedure that, if it is later called,
will abandon whatever continuation is in effect at that later time and
will instead reinstate the continuation that was in effect when the
escape procedure was created.

Calling the escape procedure may cause the invocation of @var{before}
and @var{after} procedures installed using @func{dynamic-wind}.

The escape procedure accepts the same number of arguments as the
continuation of the original call to @func{call/cc}.

The escape procedure that is passed to @var{proc} has unlimited extent
just like any other procedure in Scheme.  It may be stored in variables
or data structures and may be called as many times as desired.

If a call to @func{call/cc} occurs in a tail context, the call to
@var{proc} is also in a tail context.

The following examples show only some ways in which @func{call/cc} is
used.  If all real uses were as simple as these examples, there would be
no need for a procedure with the power of @func{call/cc}.

@example
(call-with-current-continuation
  (lambda (exit)
    (for-each (lambda (x)
                (if (negative? x)
                    (exit x)))
              '(54 0 37 -3 245 19))
    #t))
@result{}  -3

(define list-length
  (lambda (obj)
    (call-with-current-continuation
      (lambda (return)
        (letrec ((r
                  (lambda (obj)
                    (cond ((null? obj) 0)
                          ((pair? obj)
                           (+ (r (cdr obj)) 1))
                          (else (return #f))))))
          (r obj))))))

(list-length '(1 2 3 4))                        @result{}  4
(list-length '(a b . c))                        @result{} #f
(call-with-current-continuation procedure?)     @result{} #t
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Calling an escape procedure reenters the dynamic extent of
the call to @func{call/cc}, and thus restores its dynamic environment.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure values @var{obj} @dots{}
Delivers all of its arguments to its continuation.  The @func{values}
procedure might be defined as follows:

@example
(define (values . things)
  (call-with-current-continuation
    (lambda (cont) (apply cont things))))
@end example

The continuations of all non--final expressions within a sequence of
expressions, such as in @func{lambda}, @func{begin}, @func{let},
@func{let*}, @func{letrec}, @func{letrec*}, @func{let-values},
@func{let*-values}, @func{case}, and @func{cond} forms, usually take an
arbitrary number of values.

Except for these and the continuations created by
@func{call-with-values}, @func{let-values}, and @func{let*-values},
continuations implicitly accepting a single value, such as the
continuations of @meta{operator} and @meta{operand}s of procedure calls
or the @meta{test} expressions in conditionals, take exactly one value.
The effect of passing an inappropriate number of values to such a
continuation is undefined.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure call-with-values @var{producer} @var{consumer}
@var{producer} must be a procedure and should accept zero arguments.
@var{consumer} must be a procedure and should accept as many values as
@var{producer} returns.  The @func{call-with-values} procedure calls
@var{producer} with no arguments and a continuation that, when passed
some values, calls the @var{consumer} procedure with those values as
arguments.  The continuation for the call to @var{consumer} is the
continuation of the call to @func{call-with-values}.

@example
(call-with-values
    (lambda () (values 4 5))
  (lambda (a b) b))
@result{}  5

(call-with-values * -)
@result{}  -1
@end example

If a call to @code{call-with-values} occurs in a tail context, the call
to @var{consumer} is also in a tail context.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} After @var{producer} returns,
the implementation must check that @var{consumer} accepts as many values
as @var{consumer} has returned.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure dynamic-wind @var{before} @var{thunk} @var{after}
@var{before}, @var{thunk}, and @var{after} must be procedures, and each
should accept zero arguments.  These procedures may return any number of
values.

The @func{dynamic-wind} procedure calls @var{thunk} without arguments,
returning the results of this call.  Moreover, @func{dynamic-wind} calls
@var{before} without arguments whenever the dynamic extent of the call
to @var{thunk} is entered, and @var{after} without arguments whenever
the dynamic extent of the call to @var{thunk} is exited.  Thus, in the
absence of calls to escape procedures created by @func{call/cc},
@func{dynamic-wind} calls @var{before}, @var{thunk}, and @var{after}, in
that order.

While the calls to @var{before} and @var{after} are not considered to be
within the dynamic extent of the call to @var{thunk}, calls to the
@var{before} and @var{after} procedures of any other calls to
@func{dynamic-wind} that occur within the dynamic extent of the call to
@var{thunk} are considered to be within the dynamic extent of the call
to @var{thunk}.

More precisely, an escape procedure transfers control out of the dynamic
extent of a set of zero or more active @func{dynamic-wind} calls @emph{x
@dots{}} and transfer control into the dynamic extent of a set of zero
or more active @func{dynamic-wind} calls @emph{y @dots{}}.  It leaves
the dynamic extent of the most recent @emph{x} and calls without
arguments the corresponding @var{after} procedure.  If the @var{after}
procedure returns, the escape procedure proceeds to the next most recent
@emph{x}, and so on.  Once each @emph{x} has been handled in this
manner, the escape procedure calls without arguments the @var{before}
procedure corresponding to the least recent @emph{y}.  If the
@var{before} procedure returns, the escape procedure reenters the
dynamic extent of the least recent @emph{y} and proceeds with the next
least recent @emph{y}, and so on.  Once each @emph{y} has been handled
in this manner, control is transferred to the continuation packaged in
the escape procedure.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{thunk} and @var{after} only if they are
actually called.

@example
(let ((path '())
      (c #f))
  (let ((add (lambda (s)
               (set! path (cons s path)))))
    (dynamic-wind
      (lambda () (add 'connect))
      (lambda ()
        (add (call-with-current-continuation
               (lambda (c0)
                 (set! c c0)
                 'talk1))))
      (lambda () (add 'disconnect)))
    (if (< (length path) 4)
        (c 'talk2)
        (reverse path))))
@result{} (connect talk1 disconnect connect talk2 disconnect)

(let ((n 0))
  (call-with-current-continuation
    (lambda (k)
      (dynamic-wind
        (lambda ()
          (set! n (+ n 1))
          (k))
        (lambda ()
          (set! n (+ n 2)))
        (lambda ()
          (set! n (+ n 4))))))
  n)
@result{} 1

(let ((n 0))
  (call-with-current-continuation
    (lambda (k)
      (dynamic-wind
        values
        (lambda ()
          (dynamic-wind
            values
            (lambda ()
              (set! n (+ n 1))
              (k))
            (lambda ()
              (set! n (+ n 2))
              (k))))
        (lambda ()
          (set! n (+ n 4))))))
  n)
@result{} 7
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Entering a dynamic extent restores its dynamic environment.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib iteration
@section Iteration


@cindex Named let


@deffn Syntax let @meta{variable} @meta{bindings} @meta{body}
``Named @func{let}'' is a variant on the syntax of @func{let} that
provides a general looping construct and may also be used to express
recursion.  It has the same syntax and semantics as ordinary @func{let}
except that @meta{variable} is bound within @meta{body} to a procedure
whose parameters are the bound variables and whose body is @meta{body}.
Thus the execution of @meta{body} may be repeated by invoking the
procedure named by @meta{variable}.

@example
(let loop ((numbers '(3 -2 1 6 -5))
           (nonneg '())
           (neg '()))
  (cond ((null? numbers) (list nonneg neg))
        ((>= (car numbers) 0)
         (loop (cdr numbers)
               (cons (car numbers) nonneg)
               neg))
        ((< (car numbers) 0)
         (loop (cdr numbers)
               nonneg
               (cons (car numbers) neg)))))
@result{} ((6 1 3) (-5 -2))
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib quasiquotation
@section Quasiquotation


@deffn Syntax quasiquote @meta{qq template}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} unquote
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} unquote-splicing
``Backquote'' or ``quasiquote'' expressions are useful for constructing
a list or vector structure when some but not all of the desired
structure is known in advance.

@meta{qq template} should be as specified by the grammar at the end of
this entry.

If no @func{unquote} or @func{unquote-splicing} forms appear within the
@meta{qq template}, the result of evaluating @code{(quasiquote @meta{qq
template})} is equivalent to the result of evaluating @code{(quote
@meta{qq template})}.

If an @code{(unquote @meta{expression} @dots{})} form appears inside a
@meta{qq template}, however, the @meta{expression}s are evaluated
(``unquoted'') and their results are inserted into the structure instead
of the @code{unquote} form.

If an @code{(unquote-splicing @meta{expression} @dots{})} form appears
inside a @meta{qq template}, then the @meta{expression}s must evaluate
to lists; the opening and closing parentheses of the lists are then
``stripped away'' and the elements of the lists are inserted in place of
the @func{unquote-splicing} form.

Any @func{unquote-splicing} or multi--operand @func{unquote} form must
appear only within a list or vector @meta{qq template}.

The following abbreviations may be used:

@example
(quasiquote @meta{qq template})       =  `@meta{qq template}
(unquote @meta{expression})           =  ,@meta{expression}
(unquote-splicing @meta{expression})  =  ,@@@meta{expression}
@end example

Examples:

@example
`(list ,(+ 1 2) 4)                      @result{} (list 3 4)

(let ((name 'a))
  `(list ,name ',name))                 @result{} (list a (quote a))

`(a ,(+ 1 2) ,@@(map abs '(4 -5 6)) b)   @result{} (a 3 4 5 6 b)

`((foo ,(- 10 3))
  ,@@(cdr '(c)) . ,(car '(cons)))        @result{} ((foo 7) . cons)

`#(10 5 ,(sqrt 4) ,@@(map sqrt '(16 9)) 8)
                                        @result{} #(10 5 2 4 3 8)

(let ((name 'foo))
  `((unquote name name name)))          @result{} (foo foo foo)

(let ((name '(foo)))
  `((unquote-splicing name name name))) @result{} (foo foo foo)

(let ((q '((append x y) (sqrt 9))))
  ``(foo ,,@@q))
@result{} `(foo (unquote (append x y) (sqrt 9)))

(let ((x '(2 3))
      (y '(4 5)))
  `(foo (unquote (append x y) (sqrt 9))))
@result{} (foo (2 3 4 5) 3)
@end example

Quasiquote forms may be nested.  Substitutions are made only for
unquoted components appearing at the same nesting level as the outermost
@func{quasiquote}.  The nesting level increases by one inside each
successive quasiquotation, and decreases by one inside each unquotation.

@example
`(a `(b ,(+ 1 2) ,(foo ,(+ 1 3) d) e) f)
@result{}  (a `(b ,(+ 1 2) ,(foo 4 d) e) f)

(let ((name1 'x)
      (name2 'y))
  `(a `(b ,,name1 ,',name2 d) e))
@result{}  (a `(b ,x ,'y d) e)
@end example

A @func{quasiquote} expression may return either fresh, mutable objects
or literal structure for any structure that is constructed at run time
during the evaluation of the expression.  Portions that do not need to
be rebuilt are always literal.  Thus:

@example
(let ((a 3))
  `((1 2) ,a ,4 ,'five 6))
@end example

@noindent
may be equivalent to either of the following expressions:

@example
'((1 2) 3 4 five 6)

(let ((a 3))
  (cons '(1 2)
        (cons a (cons 4 (cons 'five '(6))))))
@end example

However, it is not equivalent to this expression:

@example
(let ((a 3))
  (list (list 1 2) a 4 'five 6))
@end example

It is a syntax violation if any of the identifiers @func{quasiquote},
@func{unquote}, or @func{unquote-splicing} appear in positions within a
@meta{qq template} other than as described above.

The following grammar for quasiquote expressions is not context--free.
It is presented as a recipe for generating an infinite number of
production rules.  Imagine a copy of the following rules for @emph{D =
1, 2, 3, @dots{}}.  @emph{D} keeps track of the nesting depth.

@example
@meta{qq template} -> @meta{qq template 1}
@meta{qq template 0} -> @meta{expression}
@meta{quasiquotation @emph{D}} -> (quasiquote @meta{qq template @emph{D}})
@meta{qq template @emph{D}} -> @meta{lexeme datum}
    | @meta{list qq template @emph{D}}
    | @meta{vector qq template @emph{D}}
    | @meta{unquotation @emph{D}}
@meta{list qq template @emph{D}} -> (@arbno{@meta{qq template or splice @emph{D}}})
    | (@atleastone{@meta{qq template or splice @emph{D}}} . @meta{qq template @emph{D}})
    | @meta{quasiquotation @emph{D+1}}
@meta{vector qq template @emph{D}} -> #(@arbno{@meta{qq template or splice @emph{D}}})
@meta{unquotation @emph{D}} -> (unquote @meta{qq template @emph{D-1}})
@meta{qq template or splice @emph{D}} -> @meta{qq template @emph{D}}
    | @meta{splicing unquotation @emph{D}}
@meta{splicing unquotation @emph{D}} ->
      (unquote-splicing @arbno{@meta{qq template @emph{D-1}}})
    | (unquote @arbno{@meta{qq template @emph{D-1}}})
@end example

In @func{quasiquotation}s, a @meta{list qq template @emph{D}} can
sometimes be confused with either an @meta{unquotation @emph{D}} or a
@meta{splicing unquotation @emph{D}}.  The interpretation as an
@meta{unquotation} or @meta{splicing unquotation @emph{D}} takes
precedence.
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib syntax binding
@section Binding constructs for syntactic keywords


@cindex Binding syntactic keywords
@cindex Syntactic keywords, binding


The @func{let-syntax} and @func{letrec-syntax} forms bind keywords.
Like a @func{begin} form, a @func{let-syntax} or @func{letrec-syntax}
form may appear in a definition context, in which case it is treated as
a definition, and the forms in the body must also be definitions.  A
@func{let-syntax} or @func{letrec-syntax} form may also appear in an
expression context, in which case the forms within their bodies must be
expressions.


@deffn Syntax let-syntax @meta{bindings} @meta{form} @dots{}
@meta{bindings} must have the form:

@example
((@meta{keyword} @meta{expression}) @dots{})
@end example

Each @meta{keyword} is an identifier, and each @meta{expression} is an
expression that evaluates, at macro--expansion time, to a
@emph{transformer}.  Transformers may be created by @func{syntax-rules}
or @func{identifier-syntax} or by one of the other mechanisms described
in library chapter ``@func{syntax-case}''.  It is a syntax violation for
@meta{keyword} to appear more than once in the list of keywords being
bound.

The @meta{form}s are expanded in the syntactic environment obtained by
extending the syntactic environment of the @func{let-syntax} form with
macros whose keywords are the @meta{keyword}s, bound to the specified
transformers.  Each binding of a @meta{keyword} has the @meta{form}s as
its region.

The @meta{form}s of a @func{let-syntax} form are treated, whether in
definition or expression context, as if wrapped in an implicit
@func{begin}.  Thus definitions in the result of expanding the
@meta{form}s have the same region as any definition appearing in place
of the @func{let-syntax} form would have.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation should
detect if the value of @meta{expression} cannot possibly be a
transformer.

@example
(let-syntax ([when (syntax-rules ()
                     ((when test stmt1 stmt2 ...)
                      (if test
                          (begin stmt1
                                 stmt2 ...))))])
  (let ([if #t])
    (when if (set! if 'now))
    if))
@result{}  now

(let ([x 'outer])
  (let-syntax ([m (syntax-rules () ((m) x))])
    (let ([x 'inner])
      (m))))
@result{}  outer

(let ()
  (let-syntax ([def (syntax-rules ()
                      [(def stuff ...) (define stuff ...)])])
    (def foo 42))
  foo)
@result{} 42

(let ()
  (let-syntax ())
  5)
@result{} 5
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax letrec-syntax @meta{bindings} @meta{form} @dots{}
Same as for @func{let-syntax}.

The @meta{form}s are expanded in the syntactic environment obtained by
extending the syntactic environment of the @func{letrec-syntax} form
with macros whose keywords are the @meta{keyword}s, bound to the
specified transformers.  Each binding of a @meta{keyword} has the
@meta{bindings} as well as the @meta{form}s within its region, so the
transformers can transcribe forms into uses of the macros introduced by
the @func{letrec-syntax} form.

The @meta{form}s of a @func{letrec-syntax} form are treated, whether in
definition or expression context, as if wrapped in an implicit
@func{begin}.  Thus definitions in the result of expanding the
@meta{form}s have the same region as any definition appearing in place
of the @func{letrec-syntax} form would have.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation should
detect if the value of @meta{expression} cannot possibly be a
transformer.

@example
(letrec-syntax
    ([my-or (syntax-rules ()
              [(my-or)    #f]
              [(my-or e)  e]
              [(my-or e1 e2 ...)  (let ([temp e1])
                                    (if temp
                                        temp
                                     (my-or e2 ...)))])])
  (let ([x      #f]
        [y      7]
        [temp   8]
        [let    odd?]
        [if     even?])
    (my-or x (let temp) (if y) y)))
@result{} 7
@end example

The following example highlights how @func{let-syntax} and
@func{letrec-syntax} differ.

@example
(let ([f (lambda (x) (+ x 1))])
  (let-syntax ([f (syntax-rules ()
                    [(f x) x])]
               [g (syntax-rules ()
                    [(g x) (f x)])])
    (list (f 1) (g 1))))
@result{} (1 2)

(let ([f (lambda (x) (+ x 1))])
  (letrec-syntax ([f (syntax-rules ()
                       [(f x) x])]
                  [g (syntax-rules ()
                       [(g x) (f x)])])
    (list (f 1) (g 1))))
@result{} (1 1)
@end example

The two expressions are identical except that the @func{let-syntax} form
in the first expression is a @func{letrec-syntax} form in the second.
In the first expression, the @code{f} occurring in @code{g} refers to
the @func{let}-bound variable @code{f}, whereas in the second it refers
to the keyword @code{f} whose binding is established by the
@func{letrec-syntax} form.
@end deffn


@c page
@node baselib transformers
@section Macro transformers


@cindex Macro transformers
@cindex Transformers, macro


@xref{examples macros}, for examples on macro writing.


@deffn {Syntax @code{(expand)}} syntax-rules (@meta{literal} @dots{}) @meta{syntax rule} @dots{}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax @code{(expand)}} _
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax @code{(expand)}} ...
Each @meta{literal} must be an identifier.  Each @meta{syntax rule} must
have the following form:

@example
(@meta{srpattern} @meta{template})
@end example

An @meta{srpattern} is a restricted form of @meta{pattern}, namely, a
nonempty @meta{pattern} in one of four parenthesized forms below whose
first subform is an identifier or an underscore @code{_}.  A
@meta{pattern} is an identifier, constant, or one of the following.

@example
(@meta{pattern} @dots{})
(@meta{pattern} @meta{pattern} @dots{} . @meta{pattern})
(@meta{pattern} @dots{} @meta{pattern} @meta{ellipsis} @meta{pattern} @dots{})
(@meta{pattern} @dots{} @meta{pattern} @meta{ellipsis} @meta{pattern} @dots{} . @meta{pattern})
#(@meta{pattern} @dots{})
#(@meta{pattern} @dots{} @meta{pattern} @meta{ellipsis} @meta{pattern} @dots{})
@end example

An @meta{ellipsis} is the identifier @code{...} (three periods).

A @meta{template} is a pattern variable, an identifier that is not a
pattern variable, a pattern datum, or one of the following.

@example
(@meta{subtemplate} @dots{})
(@meta{subtemplate} @dots{} . @meta{template})
#(@meta{subtemplate} @dots{})
@end example

A @meta{subtemplate} is a @meta{template} followed by zero or more
ellipses.

An instance of @func{syntax-rules} evaluates, at macro--expansion time,
to a new macro transformer by specifying a sequence of hygienic rewrite
rules.  A use of a macro whose keyword is associated with a transformer
specified by @func{syntax-rules} is matched against the patterns
contained in the @meta{syntax rule}s, beginning with the leftmost
@meta{syntax rule}.  When a match is found, the macro use is transcribed
hygienically according to the template.  It is a syntax violation when
no match is found.

An identifier appearing within a @meta{pattern} may be an underscore
@code{_}, a literal identifier listed in the list of literals
@code{(@meta{literal} @dots{})}, or an ellipsis @code{...}.  All other
identifiers appearing within a @meta{pattern} are @emph{pattern
variables}.  It is a syntax violation if an ellipsis or underscore
appears in @code{(@meta{literal} @dots{})}.

While the first subform of @meta{srpattern} may be an identifier, the
identifier is not involved in the matching and is not considered a
pattern variable or literal identifier.

Pattern variables match arbitrary input subforms and are used to refer
to elements of the input.  It is a syntax violation if the same pattern
variable appears more than once in a @meta{pattern}.

Underscores, @code{_}, also match arbitrary input subforms but are not
pattern variables and so cannot be used to refer to those elements.
Multiple underscores may appear in a @meta{pattern}.

A @meta{literal} identifier matches an input subform if and only if the
input subform is an identifier and either both its occurrence in the
input expression and its occurrence in the list of literals have the
same lexical binding, or the two identifiers have the same name and both
have no lexical binding.

A subpattern followed by an ellipsis can match zero or more elements of
the input.

More formally, an input form @math{F} matches a pattern @math{P} if and
only if one of the following holds:

@itemize
@item
@math{P} is an underscore (@code{_}).

@item
@math{P} is a pattern variable.

@item
@math{P} is a literal identifier and @math{F} is an identifier such that
both @math{P} and @math{F} would refer to the same binding if both were
to appear in the output of the macro outside of any bindings inserted
into the output of the macro.  (If neither of two like--named
identifiers refers to any binding, i.e., both are undefined, they are
considered to refer to the same binding.)

@item
@math{P} is of the form:

@example
(P_1 @dots{} P_n)
@end example

@noindent
and @math{F} is a list of @math{n} elements that match @math{P_1}
through @math{P_n}.

@item
@math{P} is of the form:

@example
(P_1 @dots{} P_n . P_x)
@end example

@noindent
and @math{F} is a list or improper list of @math{n} or more elements
whose first @math{n} elements match @math{P_1} through @math{P_n} and
whose @math{n}-th cdr matches @math{P_x}.

@item
@math{P} is of the form:

@example
(P_1 @dots{} P_k P_e @meta{ellipsis} P_(m+1) @dots{} P_n)
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{ellipsis} is the identifier @code{...}  and @math{F} is a
list of @math{n} elements whose first @math{k} elements match @math{P_1}
through @math{P_k}, whose next @math{m-k} elements each match
@math{P_e}, and whose remaining @math{n-m} elements match @math{P_(m+1)}
through @math{P_n}.

@item
@math{P} is of the form:

@example
(P_1 @dots{} P_k P_e @meta{ellipsis} P_(m+1) @dots{} P_n . P_x)
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{ellipsis} is the identifier @code{...} and @math{F} is a
list or improper list of @math{n} elements whose first @math{k} elements
match @math{P_1} through @math{P_k}, whose next @math{m-k} elements each
match @math{P_e}, whose next @math{n-m} elements match @math{P_(m+1)}
through @math{P_n}, and whose @math{n}th and final cdr matches
@math{P_x}.

@item
@math{P} is of the form:

@example
#(P_1 @dots{} P_n)
@end example

@noindent
and @math{F} is a vector of @math{n} elements that match @math{P_1}
through @math{P_n}.

@item
@math{P} is of the form:

@example
#(P_1 @dots{} P_k P_e @meta{ellipsis} P_(m+1) @dots{} P_n)
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{ellipsis} is the identifier @code{...} and @math{F} is a
vector of @math{n} or more elements whose first @math{k} elements match
@math{P_1} through @math{P_k}, whose next @math{m-k} elements each match
@math{P_e}, and whose remaining @math{n-m} elements match @math{P_(m+1)}
through @math{P_n}.

@item
@math{P} is a pattern datum (any nonlist, nonvector, nonsymbol datum)
and @math{F} is equal to @math{P} in the sense of the @func{equal?}
procedure.
@end itemize

When a macro use is transcribed according to the template of the
matching @meta{syntax rule}, pattern variables that occur in the
template are replaced by the subforms they match in the input.

Pattern data and identifiers that are not pattern variables or ellipses
are copied into the output.  A subtemplate followed by an ellipsis
expands into zero or more occurrences of the subtemplate.  Pattern
variables that occur in subpatterns followed by one or more ellipses may
occur only in subtemplates that are followed by (at least) as many
ellipses.  These pattern variables are replaced in the output by the
input subforms to which they are bound, distributed as specified.  If a
pattern variable is followed by more ellipses in the subtemplate than in
the associated subpattern, the input form is replicated as necessary.
The subtemplate must contain at least one pattern variable from a
subpattern followed by an ellipsis, and for at least one such pattern
variable, the subtemplate must be followed by exactly as many ellipses
as the subpattern in which the pattern variable appears.  (Otherwise,
the expander would not be able to determine how many times the subform
should be repeated in the output.)  It is a syntax violation if the
constraints of this paragraph are not met.

A template of the form @code{(@meta{ellipsis} @meta{template})} is
identical to @meta{template}, except that ellipses within the template
have no special meaning.  That is, any ellipses contained within
@meta{template} are treated as ordinary identifiers.  In particular, the
template @code{(... ...)} produces a single ellipsis, @code{...}.  This
allows syntactic abstractions to expand into forms containing ellipses.

@example
(define-syntax be-like-begin
  (syntax-rules ()
    [(be-like-begin name)
     (define-syntax name
       (syntax-rules ()
         ((name expr (... ...))
          (begin expr (... ...)))))]))

(be-like-begin sequence)
(sequence 1 2 3 4) => 4
@end example

As an example for hygienic use of auxiliary identifier, if @func{let}
and @func{cond} are defined as in @ref{baselib expressions binding,let}
and @ref{lang derived,cond} then they are hygienic (as required) and the
following is not an error.

@example
(let ((=> #f))
  (cond (#t => 'ok)))
@result{} ok
@end example

The macro transformer for @func{cond} recognizes @code{=>} as a local
variable, and hence an expression, and not as the identifier @code{=>},
which the macro transformer treats as a syntactic keyword.  Thus the
example expands into:

@example
(let ((=> #f))
  (if #t (begin => 'ok)))
@end example

@noindent
instead of:

@example
(let ((=> #f))
  (let ((temp #t))
    (if temp ('ok temp))))
@end example

@noindent
which would result in an assertion violation.
@end deffn


@deffn {Syntax @code{(expand)}} identifier-syntax @meta{template}
@deffnx {Syntax @code{(expand)}} identifier-syntax (@hyperi{id} @metai{template}) ((set! @hyperii{id} @meta{pattern}) @hyperii{template})
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax @code{(expand)}} set!
The @meta{id}s must be identifiers.  The @meta{template}s must be as for
@func{syntax-rules}.

When a keyword is bound to a transformer produced by the first form of
@func{identifier-syntax}, references to the keyword within the scope of
the binding are replaced by @meta{template}.

@example
(define p (cons 4 5))
(define-syntax p.car (identifier-syntax (car p)))
p.car           @result{} 4
(set! p.car 15) @result{} exception &syntax
@end example

The second, more general, form of @func{identifier-syntax} permits the
transformer to determine what happens when @code{set!} is used.  In this
case, uses of the identifier by itself are replaced by
@hyperi{template}, and uses of @code{set!} with the identifier are
replaced by @hyperii{template}.

@example
(define p (cons 4 5))
(define-syntax p.car
  (identifier-syntax
    [_ (car p)]
    [(set! _ e) (set-car! p e)]))
(set! p.car 15)
p.car           @result{} 15
p               @result{} (15 . 5)
@end example
@end deffn



@c page
@node baselib tail call
@section Tail calls and tail contexts


@cindex Tail call
@cindex Tail contexts


A @emph{tail call} is a procedure call that occurs in a @emph{tail
context}.  Tail contexts are defined inductively.  Note that a tail
context is always determined with respect to a particular lambda
expression.

@itemize
@item
The last expression within the body of a lambda expression, shown as
@meta{tail expression} below, occurs in a tail context.

@example
(lambda @meta{formals}
  @arbno{@meta{definition}}
  @arbno{@meta{expression}} @meta{tail expression})
@end example

@item
If one of the following expressions is in a tail context, then the
subexpressions shown as @meta{tail expression} are in a tail context.
These were derived from specifications of the syntax of the forms
described in this chapter by replacing some occurrences of
@meta{expression} with @meta{tail expression}.  Only those rules that
contain tail contexts are shown here.

@example
(if @meta{expression} @meta{tail expression} @meta{tail expression})
(if @meta{expression} @meta{tail expression})

(cond @atleastone{@meta{cond clause}})
(cond @arbno{@meta{cond clause}} (else @meta{tail sequence}))

(case @meta{expression}
  @atleastone{@meta{case clause}})
(case @meta{expression}
  @arbno{@meta{case clause}}
  (else @meta{tail sequence}))

(and @arbno{@meta{expression}} @meta{tail expression})
(or @arbno{@meta{expression}} @meta{tail expression})

(let @meta{bindings} @meta{tail body})
(let @meta{variable} @meta{bindings} @meta{tail body})
(let* @meta{bindings} @meta{tail body})
(letrec* @meta{bindings} @meta{tail body})
(letrec @meta{bindings} @meta{tail body})
(let-values @meta{mv-bindings} @meta{tail body})
(let*-values @meta{mv-bindings} @meta{tail body})

(let-syntax @meta{bindings} @meta{tail body})
(letrec-syntax @meta{bindings} @meta{tail body})

(begin @meta{tail sequence})
@end example

A @meta{cond clause} is:

@example
(@meta{test} @meta{tail sequence})
@end example

@noindent
a @meta{case clause} is:

@example
((@arbno{@meta{datum}}) @meta{tail sequence})
@end example

@noindent
a @meta{tail body} is:

@example
@arbno{@meta{definition}} @meta{tail sequence}
@end example

@noindent
and a @meta{tail sequence} is:

@example
@arbno{@meta{expression}} @meta{tail expression}
@end example

@item
If a @func{cond} expression is in a tail context, and has a clause of
the form @code{(@hyperi{expression} => @hyperii{expression})} then the
(implied) call to the procedure that results from the evaluation of
@hyperii{expression} is in a tail context.  @hyperii{expression} itself
is not in a tail context.
@end itemize

Certain built--in procedures must also perform tail calls.  The first
argument passed to @func{apply} and to @func{call/cc}, and the second
argument passed to @func{call-with-values}, must be called via a tail
call.

In the following example the only tail call is the call to @func{f}.
None of the calls to @func{g} or @func{h} are tail calls.  The reference
to @code{x} is in a tail context, but it is not a call and thus is not a
tail call.

@example
(lambda ()
  (if (g)
      (let ((x (h)))
        x)
      (and (g) (f))))
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Implementations may recognize that some non--tail calls,
such as the call to @func{h} above, can be evaluated as though they were
tail calls.  In the example above, the @func{let} expression could be
compiled as a tail call to @func{h}.  (The possibility of @func{h}
returning an unexpected number of values can be ignored, because in that
case the effect of the @func{let} is explicitly unspecified and
implementation--dependent.)
@end quotation


@c page
@node stdlib
@chapter Standard libraries


@menu
* stdlib unicode::              Unicode.
* stdlib bytevector::           Bytevectors.
* stdlib list::                 List utilities.
* stdlib sorting::              Sorting.
* stdlib control::              Control structures.
* stdlib records::              Records.
* stdlib exceptions::           Exceptions and conditions.
* stdlib io::                   Input/output.
* stdlib files::                File system.
* stdlib programlib::           Command line access and exit values.
* stdlib arithmetics::          Arithmetics.
* stdlib syntax-case::          Syntax-case.
* stdlib hashtable::            Hashtables.
* stdlib enum::                 Enumerations.
* stdlib complib::              Composite library.
* stdlib eval::                 Evaluation.
* stdlib mutable pairs::        Mutable pairs.
* stdlib mutable strings::      Mutable strings.
* stdlib rfive compat::         @rnrs{5} compatibility.
@end menu


@c page
@node stdlib unicode
@section Unicode


The procedures exported by the @rsixlibrary{unicode} library provide
access to some aspects of the Unicode semantics for characters and
strings: category information, case--independent comparisons, case
mappings, and normalization.

Some of the procedures that operate on characters or strings ignore the
difference between upper case and lower case.  These procedures have
@code{-ci} (for ``case insensitive'') embedded in their names.


@menu
* stdlib unicode characters::   Characters.
* stdlib unicode strings::      Strings.
@end menu


@c page
@node stdlib unicode characters
@subsection Characters


@deffn Procedure char-upcase @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure char-downcase @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure char-titlecase @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure char-foldcase @var{char}
These procedures take a character argument and return a character
result.

If the argument is an upper--case or title--case character, and if there
is a single character that is its lower--case form, then
@func{char-downcase} returns that character.

If the argument is a lower--case or title--case character, and there is
a single character that is its upper--case form, then @func{char-upcase}
returns that character.

If the argument is a lower--case or upper--case character, and there is
a single character that is its title--case form, then
@func{char-titlecase} returns that character.

If the argument is not a title--case character and there is no single
character that is its title--case form, then @func{char-titlecase}
returns the upper--case form of the argument.

Finally, if the character has a case--folded character, then
@func{char-foldcase} returns that character.  Otherwise the character
returned is the same as the argument.

For Turkic characters @code{#\x130} and @code{#\x131},
@func{char-foldcase} behaves as the identity function; otherwise
@func{char-foldcase} is the same as @func{char-downcase} composed with
@func{char-upcase}.

@example
(char-upcase #\i)               @result{} #\I
(char-downcase #\i)             @result{} #\i
(char-titlecase #\i)            @result{} #\I
(char-foldcase #\i)             @result{} #\i
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} @func{char-titlecase} does not always return a title--case
character.
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note:} These procedures are consistent with Unicode's
locale--independent mappings from scalar values to scalar values for
upcase, downcase, titlecase, and case--folding operations.  These
mappings can be extracted from @file{UnicodeData.txt} and
@file{CaseFolding.txt} from the Unicode Consortium, ignoring Turkic
mappings in the latter.

Note that these character--based procedures are an incomplete
approximation to case conversion, even ignoring the user's locale.  In
general, case mappings require the context of a string, both in
arguments and in result.  The @func{string-upcase},
@func{string-downcase}, @func{string-titlecase}, and
@func{string-foldcase} procedures (@ref{stdlib unicode strings} perform
more general case conversion.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure char-ci=? @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure char-ci<? @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure char-ci>? @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure char-ci<=? @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure char-ci>=? @vari{char} @varii{char} @variii{char} @dots{}
These procedures are similar to @func{char=?}, etc., but operate on the
case--folded versions of the characters.

@example
(char-ci<? #\z #\Z)             @result{} #f
(char-ci=? #\z #\Z)             @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure char-alphabetic? @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure char-numeric? @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure char-whitespace? @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure char-upper-case? @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure char-lower-case? @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure char-title-case? @var{char}
These procedures return @true{} if their arguments are alphabetic,
numeric, whitespace, upper--case, lower--case, or title--case
characters, respectively; otherwise they return @false{}.

A character is alphabetic if it has the Unicode ``Alphabetic'' property.
A character is numeric if it has the Unicode ``Numeric'' property.  A
character is whitespace if has the Unicode ``White_Space'' property.  A
character is upper case if it has the Unicode ``Uppercase'' property,
lower case if it has the ``Lowercase'' property, and title case if it is
in the Lt general category.

@example
(char-alphabetic? #\a)          @result{} #t
(char-numeric? #\1)             @result{} #t
(char-whitespace? #\space)      @result{} #t
(char-whitespace? #\x00A0)      @result{} #t
(char-lower-case? #\x00AA)      @result{} #t
(char-title-case? #\I)          @result{} #f
(char-title-case? #\x01C5)      @result{} #t
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure char-general-category @var{char}
Return a symbol representing the Unicode general category of
@var{char}, one of @code{Lu}, @code{Ll}, @code{Lt}, @code{Lm},
@code{Lo}, @code{Mn}, @code{Mc}, @code{Me}, @code{Nd}, @code{Nl},
@code{No}, @code{Ps}, @code{Pe}, @code{Pi}, @code{Pf}, @code{Pd},
@code{Pc}, @code{Po}, @code{Sc}, @code{Sm}, @code{Sk}, @code{So},
@code{Zs}, @code{Zp}, @code{Zl}, @code{Cc}, @code{Cf}, @code{Cs},
@code{Co}, or @code{Cn}.

@example
(char-general-category #\a)             @result{} Ll
(char-general-category #\space)         @result{} Zs
(char-general-category #\x10FFFF)       @result{} Cn
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib unicode strings
@subsection Strings


@deffn Procedure string-upcase @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure string-downcase @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure string-titlecase @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure string-foldcase @var{string}
These procedures take a string argument and return a string result.
They are defined in terms of Unicode's locale--independent case mappings
from Unicode scalar--value sequences to scalar--value sequences.  In
particular, the length of the result string can be different from the
length of the input string.  When the specified result is equal in the
sense of @func{string=?} to the argument, these procedures may return
the argument instead of a newly allocated string.

The @func{string-upcase} procedure converts a string to upper case;
@func{string-downcase} converts a string to lower case.  The
@func{string-foldcase} procedure converts the string to its case--folded
counterpart, using the full case--folding mapping, but without the
special mappings for Turkic languages.  The @func{string-titlecase}
procedure converts the first cased character of each word, and downcases
all other cased characters.

@example
(string-upcase "Hi")                    @result{} "HI"
(string-downcase "Hi")                  @result{} "hi"
(string-foldcase "Hi")                  @result{} "hi"

(string-titlecase "kNock KNoCK")        @result{} "Knock Knock"
(string-titlecase "who's there?")       @result{} "Who's There?"
(string-titlecase "r6rs")               @result{} "R6rs"
(string-titlecase "R6RS")               @result{} "R6rs"
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The case mappings needed for implementing these procedures
can be extracted from @file{UnicodeData.txt}, @file{SpecialCasing.txt},
@file{WordBreakProperty.txt} (the ``MidLetter'' property partly defines
case--ignorable characters), and @file{CaseFolding.txt} from the Unicode
Consortium.

Since these procedures are locale--independent, they may not be
appropriate for some locales.
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Word breaking, as needed for the correct casing of the
upper case greek sigma and for @func{string-titlecase}, is specified in
Unicode Standard Annex #29.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-ci=? @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure string-ci<? @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure string-ci>? @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure string-ci<=? @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure string-ci>=? @vari{string} @varii{string} @variii{string} @dots{}
These procedures are similar to @func{string=?}, etc., but operate on
the case--folded versions of the strings.

@example
(string-ci<? "z" "Z")                   @result{} #f
(string-ci=? "z" "Z")                   @result{} #t
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-normalize-nfd @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure string-normalize-nfkd @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure string-normalize-nfc @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure string-normalize-nfkc @var{string}
These procedures take a string argument and return a string result,
which is the input string normalized to Unicode normalization form D,
KD, C, or KC, respectively.  When the specified result is equal in the
sense of @func{string=?} to the argument, these procedures may return
the argument instead of a newly allocated string.

@example
(string-normalize-nfd "\xE9;")          @result{} "\x65;\x301;"
(string-normalize-nfc "\xE9;")          @result{} "\xE9;"
(string-normalize-nfd "\x65;\x301;")    @result{} "\x65;\x301;"
(string-normalize-nfc "\x65;\x301;")    @result{} "\xE9;"
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib bytevector
@section Bytevectors


Many applications deal with blocks of binary data by accessing them in
various ways---extracting signed or unsigned numbers of various sizes.
Therefore, the @rsixlibrary{bytevectors} library provides a single type
for blocks of binary data with multiple ways to access that data. It
deals with integers and floating--point representations in various sizes
with specified endianness.

Bytevectors are objects of a disjoint type.  Conceptually, a bytevector
represents a sequence of 8-bit bytes.  The description of bytevectors
uses the term @emph{byte} for an exact integer object in the interval
@math{(-128, @dots{}, 127)} and the term @emph{octet} for an exact
integer object in the interval @math{(0, @dots{}, 255)}.  A byte
corresponds to its two's complement representation as an octet.

The length of a bytevector is the number of bytes it contains. This
number is fixed.  A valid index into a bytevector is an exact,
non--negative integer object less than the length of the bytevector.
The first byte of a bytevector has index 0; the last byte has an index
one less than the length of the bytevector.

Generally, the access procedures come in different flavors according to
the size of the represented integer and the endianness of the
representation.  The procedures also distinguish signed and unsigned
representations.  The signed representations all use two's complement.

Like string literals, literals representing bytevectors do not need to
be quoted:

@example
#vu8(12 23 123)         @result{} #vu8(12 23 123)
@end example


@menu
* stdlib bytevector endianness::        Endianness.
* stdlib bytevector general::           General operations.
* stdlib bytevector bytes and octets::  Operations on bytes and octets.
* stdlib bytevector integers::          Operations on integers of
                                        arbitrary size.
* stdlib bytevector integers 16::       Operations on 16-bit integers.
* stdlib bytevector integers 32::       Operations on 32-bit integers.
* stdlib bytevector integers 64::       Operations on 64-bit integers.
* stdlib bytevector flonum::            Operations on @ieee{} 754
                                        representations.
* stdlib bytevector strings::           Operations on strings.
@end menu


@c page
@node stdlib bytevector endianness
@subsection Endianness


Many operations described in this chapter accept an @emph{endianness}
argument.  Endianness describes the encoding of exact integer objects as
several contiguous bytes in a bytevector.  For this purpose, the binary
representation of the integer object is split into consecutive bytes.
The little--endian encoding places the least significant byte of an
integer first, with the other bytes following in increasing order of
significance.  The big--endian encoding places the most significant byte
of an integer first, with the other bytes following in decreasing order
of significance.

This terminology also applies to @ieee{} 754 numbers: @ieee{} 754
describes how to represent a floating--point number as an exact integer
object, and endianness describes how the bytes of such an integer are
laid out in a bytevector.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Little-- and big--endianness are only the most common kinds
of endianness.  Some architectures distinguish between the endianness at
different levels of a binary representation.
@end quotation


@c page
@node stdlib bytevector general
@subsection General operations


@deffn Syntax endianness @meta{endianness symbol}
The name of @meta{endianness symbol} must be a symbol describing an
endianness.  An implementation must support at least the symbols
@code{big} and @code{little}, but may support other endianness symbols.

@code{(endianness @meta{endianness symbol})} evaluates to the symbol
named @meta{endianness symbol}.  Whenever one of the procedures
operating on bytevectors accepts an endianness as an argument, that
argument must be one of these symbols.  It is a syntax violation for
@meta{endianness symbol} to be anything other than an endianness symbol
supported by the implementation.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Implementors should use widely accepted designations for
endianness symbols other than @code{big} and @code{little}.
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Only the name of @meta{endianness symbol} is significant.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure native-endianness
Return the endianness symbol associated implementation's preferred
endianness (usually that of the underlying machine architecture).  This
may be any @meta{endianness symbol}, including a symbol other than
@code{big} and @code{little}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bytevector? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a bytevector, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-bytevector @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure make-bytevector @var{k} @var{fill}
Return a newly allocated bytevector of @var{k} bytes.  If the @var{fill}
argument is missing, the initial contents of the returned bytevector are
unspecified.  If the @var{fill} argument is present, it must be an exact
integer object in the interval @math{(-128, @dots{} 255)} that specifies
the initial value for the bytes of the bytevector: If @var{fill} is
positive, it is interpreted as an octet; if it is negative, it is
interpreted as a byte.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bytevector-length @var{bytevector}
Return, as an exact integer object, the number of bytes in
@var{bytevector}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {bytevector=?} @vari{bytevector} @varii{bytevector}
Return @true{} if @vari{bytevector} and @varii{bytevector} are equal;
that is, if they have the same length and equal bytes at all valid
indices.  It returns @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {bytevector-fill!} @var{bytevector} @var{fill}
The @var{fill} argument is as in the description of the
@func{make-bytevector} procedure.  The @func{bytevector-fill!}
procedure stores @var{fill} in every element of @var{bytevector} and
returns unspecified values.  Analogous to @func{vector-fill!}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {bytevector-copy!} @var{source} @var{source-start} @var{target} @var{target-start} @var{k}
@var{source} and @var{target} must be bytevectors.  @var{source-start},
@var{target-start}, and @var{k} must be non--negative exact integer
objects that satisfy:

@example
0 <= @var{source-start} <= @var{source-start} + @var{k} <= l_@var{source}
0 <= @var{target-start} <= @var{target-start} + @var{k} <= l_@var{target}
@end example

@noindent
where @emph{l_@var{source}} is the length of @var{source} and
@emph{l_@var{target}} is the length of @var{target}.

The @func{bytevector-copy!} procedure copies the bytes from @var{source}
at indices:

@example
@var{source-start}, @dots{}, @var{source-start} + @var{k} - 1
@end example

@noindent
to consecutive indices in @var{target} starting at @var{target-index}.

This must work even if the memory regions for the source and the target
overlap, i.e., the bytes at the target location after the copy must be
equal to the bytes at the source location before the copy.

This returns unspecified values.

@example
(let ((b (u8-list->bytevector '(1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8))))
  (bytevector-copy! b 0 b 3 4)
  (bytevector->u8-list b))
@result{} (1 2 3 1 2 3 4 8)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bytevector-copy @var{bytevector}
Return a newly allocated copy of @var{bytevector}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib bytevector bytes and octets
@subsection Operations on bytes and octets


@deffn Procedure bytevector-u8-ref @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure bytevector-s8-ref @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@var{k} must be a valid index of @var{bytevector}.

The @func{bytevector-u8-ref} procedure returns the byte at index @var{k}
of @var{bytevector}, as an octet.

The @func{bytevector-s8-ref} procedure returns the byte at index @var{k}
of @var{bytevector}, as a (signed) byte.

@example
(let ((b1 (make-bytevector 16 -127))
      (b2 (make-bytevector 16 255)))
  (list
    (bytevector-s8-ref b1 0)
    (bytevector-u8-ref b1 0)
    (bytevector-s8-ref b2 0)
    (bytevector-u8-ref b2 0)))
@result{} (-127 129 -1 255)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {bytevector-u8-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{octet}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s8-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{byte}
@var{k} must be a valid index of @var{bytevector}.

The @func{bytevector-u8-set!} procedure stores @var{octet} in element
@var{k} of @var{bytevector}.

The @func{bytevector-s8-set!} procedure stores the two's--complement
representation of @var{byte} in element @var{k} of @var{bytevector}.

Both procedures return unspecified values.

@example
(let ((b (make-bytevector 16 -127)))

  (bytevector-s8-set! b 0 -126)
  (bytevector-u8-set! b 1 246)

  (list
    (bytevector-s8-ref b 0)
    (bytevector-u8-ref b 0)
    (bytevector-s8-ref b 1)
    (bytevector-u8-ref b 1)))
@result{} (-126 130 -10 246)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {bytevector->u8-list} @var{bytevector}
@deffnx Procedure {u8-list->bytevector} @var{list}
@var{list} must be a list of octets.

The @func{bytevector->u8-list} procedure returns a newly allocated list
of the octets of @var{bytevector} in the same order.

The @func{u8-list->bytevector} procedure returns a newly allocated
bytevector whose elements are the elements of list @var{list}, in the
same order.  It is analogous to @func{list->vector}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib bytevector integers
@subsection Operations on integers of arbitrary size


@deffn Procedure bytevector-uint-ref @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness} @var{size}
@deffnx Procedure bytevector-sint-ref @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness} @var{size}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-uint-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n} @var{endianness} @var{size}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-sint-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n} @var{endianness} @var{size}
@var{size} must be a positive exact integer object.  @var{k}, @dots{},
@var{k}+@var{size}-1 must be valid indices of @var{bytevector}.

The @func{bytevector-uint-ref} procedure retrieves the exact integer
object corresponding to the unsigned representation of size @var{size}
and specified by @var{endianness} at indices @math{@var{k}, @dots{},
@var{k} + @var{size} - 1}.

The @func{bytevector-sint-ref} procedure retrieves the exact integer
object corresponding to the two's--complement representation of size
@var{size} and specified by @var{endianness} at indices @var{k},
@dots{}, @var{k}+@var{size}-1.

For @func{bytevector-uint-set!}, @var{n} must be an exact integer object
in the interval @code{(0, @dots{}, 256^(size-1))}.

The @func{bytevector-uint-set!} procedure stores the unsigned
representation of size @var{size} and specified by @var{endianness} into
@var{bytevector} at indices @math{@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k} + @var{size}
- 1}.

For @func{bytevector-sint-set!}, @var{n} must be an exact integer object
in the interval @math{(-(256^size)/2, @dots{}, (256^(size))/2-1)}.
@func{bytevector-sint-set!} stores the two's--complement representation
of size @var{size} and specified by @var{endianness} into
@var{bytevector} at indices @math{@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k} + @var{size}
- 1}.

The @code{...-set!} procedures return unspecified values.

@example
(define b (make-bytevector 16 -127))

(bytevector-uint-set! b 0 (- (expt 2 128) 3) (endianness little) 16)

(bytevector-uint-ref b 0 (endianness little) 16)
@result{} #xfffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffd

(bytevector-sint-ref b 0 (endianness little) 16)
@result{} -3

(bytevector->u8-list b)
@result{} (253 255 255 255 255 255 255 255
    255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255)

(bytevector-uint-set! b 0 (- (expt 2 128) 3) (endianness big) 16)

(bytevector-uint-ref b 0 (endianness big) 16)
@result{} #xfffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffd

(bytevector-sint-ref b 0 (endianness big) 16)
@result{} -3

(bytevector->u8-list b)
@result{} (255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255
    255 255 255 255 255 255 255 253))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {bytevector->uint-list} @var{bytevector} @var{endianness} @var{size}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector->sint-list} @var{bytevector} @var{endianness} @var{size}
@deffnx Procedure {uint-list->bytevector} @var{list} @var{endianness} @var{size}
@deffnx Procedure {sint-list->bytevector} @var{list} @var{endianness} @var{size}
@var{size} must be a positive exact integer object.

For @func{uint-list->bytevector}, @var{list} must be a list of exact
integer objects in the interval @math{(0, @dots{}, (256^size)-1)}.

For @func{sint-list->bytevector}, @var{list} must be a list of exact
integer objects in the interval @math{(-(256^size)/2, @dots{},
(256^(size))/2-1)}.

The length of @var{bytevector} must be divisible by @var{size}.

These procedures convert between lists of integer objects and their
consecutive representations according to @var{size} and @var{endianness}
in the @var{bytevector} objects in the same way as
@func{bytevector->u8-list} and @func{u8-list->bytevector} do for
one--byte representations.

@example
(let ((b (u8-list->bytevector '(1 2 3 255 1 2 1 2))))
  (bytevector->sint-list b (endianness little) 2))
@result{} (513 -253 513 513)

(let ((b (u8-list->bytevector '(1 2 3 255 1 2 1 2))))
  (bytevector->uint-list b (endianness little) 2))
@result{} (513 65283 513 513)
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib bytevector integers 16
@subsection Operations on 16--bit integers


@deffn Procedure {bytevector-u16-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s16-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-u16-native-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s16-native-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-u16-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s16-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-u16-native-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s16-native-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n}
@var{k} must be a valid index of @var{bytevector}; so must @var{k}+1.

For @func{bytevector-u16-set!} and @func{bytevector-u16-native-set!},
@var{n} must be an exact integer object in the interval @math{0 <= n <=
2^16-1}.

For @func{bytevector-s16-set!} and @func{bytevector-s16-native-set!},
@var{n} must be an exact integer object in the interval @math{-2^15 <= n
<= 2^15-1}.

These procedures retrieve and set two--byte representations of numbers
at indices @var{k} and @math{@var{k}+1} according to the endianness
specified by @var{endianness}.  The procedures with @code{u16} in their
names deal with the unsigned representation; those with @code{s16} in
their names deal with the two's--complement representation.

The procedures with @code{native} in their names employ the native
endianness, and work only at aligned indices: @var{k} must be a multiple
of @math{2}.

The @code{...-set!} procedures return unspecified values.

@example
(define b
  (u8-list->bytevector
    '(255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255
      255 255 255 255 255 255 255 253)))

(bytevector-u16-ref b 14 (endianness little))           @result{} 65023
(bytevector-s16-ref b 14 (endianness little))           @result{} -513
(bytevector-u16-ref b 14 (endianness big))              @result{} 65533
(bytevector-s16-ref b 14 (endianness big))              @result{} -3

(bytevector-u16-set! b 0 12345 (endianness little))
(bytevector-u16-ref b 0 (endianness little))            @result{} 12345

(bytevector-u16-native-set! b 0 12345)
(bytevector-u16-native-ref b 0)                         @result{} 12345

(bytevector-u16-ref b 0 (endianness little))            @result{} unspecified
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib bytevector integers 32
@subsection Operations on 32--bit integers


@deffn Procedure {bytevector-u32-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s32-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-u32-native-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s32-native-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-u32-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s32-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-u32-native-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s32-native-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n}
@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k}+3 must be valid indices of @var{bytevector}.

For @func{bytevector-u32-set!} and @func{bytevector-u32-native-set!},
@var{n} must be an exact integer object in the interval @math{0 <= n <=
2^32-1}.

For @func{bytevector-s32-set!} and @func{bytevector-s32-native-set!},
@var{n} must be an exact integer object in the interval @math{-2^31 <= n
<= 2^32-1}.

These retrieve and set four--byte representations of numbers at indices
@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k}+3, according to the endianness specified by
@var{endianness}.  The procedures with @code{u32} in their names deal
with the unsigned representation; those with @code{s32} with the
two's--complement representation.

The procedures with @code{native} in their names employ the native
endianness, and work only at aligned indices: @var{k} must be a multiple
of @math{4}.

The @code{...-set!} procedures return unspecified values.

@example
(define b
  (u8-list->bytevector
    '(255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255
      255 255 255 255 255 255 255 253)))

(bytevector-u32-ref b 12 (endianness little))   @result{} 4261412863
(bytevector-s32-ref b 12 (endianness little))   @result{} -33554433
(bytevector-u32-ref b 12 (endianness big))      @result{} 4294967293
(bytevector-s32-ref b 12 (endianness big))      @result{} -3
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib bytevector integers 64
@subsection Operations on 64--bit integers


@deffn Procedure {bytevector-u64-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s64-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-u64-native-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s64-native-ref} @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-u64-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s64-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-u64-native-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-s64-native-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{n}
@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k}+7 must be valid indices of @var{bytevector}.

For @func{bytevector-u64-set!} and @func{bytevector-u64-native-set!},
@var{n} must be an exact integer object in the interval @math{0 <= n <=
2^64-1}.

For @func{bytevector-s64-set!} and @func{bytevector-s64-native-set!},
@var{n} must be an exact integer object in the interval @math{-2^63 <= n
<= 2^64-1}.

These retrieve and set eight--byte representations of numbers at indices
@math{@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k}+7}, according to the endianness
specified by @var{endianness}.  The procedures with @code{u64} in their
names deal with the unsigned representation; those with @code{s64} with
the two's--complement representation.

The procedures with @code{native} in their names employ the native
endianness, and work only at aligned indices: @var{k} must be a multiple
of @math{8}.

The @code{...-set!} procedures return unspecified values.

@example
(define b
  (u8-list->bytevector
    '(255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255
      255 255 255 255 255 255 255 253)))

(bytevector-u64-ref b 8 (endianness little))    @result{} 18302628885633695743
(bytevector-s64-ref b 8 (endianness little))    @result{} -144115188075855873
(bytevector-u64-ref b 8 (endianness big))       @result{} 18446744073709551613
(bytevector-s64-ref b 8 (endianness big))       @result{} -3
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib bytevector flonum
@subsection Operations on @ieee{} 754 representations


@deffn Procedure bytevector-ieee-single-native-ref @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure bytevector-ieee-single-ref @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness}
@math{@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k}+3} must be valid indices of
@var{bytevector}.

For @code{bytevector-ieee-single-native-ref}, @var{k} must be a multiple
of @math{4}.

These procedures return the inexact real number object that best
represents the @ieee{} 754 single--precision number represented by the
four bytes beginning at index @var{k}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bytevector-ieee-double-native-ref @var{bytevector} @var{k}
@deffnx Procedure bytevector-ieee-double-ref @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{endianness}
@math{@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k}+7} must be valid indices of
@var{bytevector}.

For @func{bytevector-ieee-double-native-ref}, @var{k} must be a multiple
of @math{8}.

These procedures return the inexact real number object that best
represents the @ieee{} 754 double--precision number represented by the
eight bytes beginning at index @var{k}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {bytevector-ieee-single-native-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{x}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-ieee-single-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{x} @var{endianness}
@math{@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k}+3} must be valid indices of
@var{bytevector}.

For @func{bytevector-ieee-single-native-set!}, @var{k} must be a
multiple of @math{4}.

These procedures store an @ieee{} 754 single--precision representation
of @var{x} into elements @var{k} through @var{k}+3 of @var{bytevector},
and return unspecified values.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {bytevector-ieee-double-native-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{x}
@deffnx Procedure {bytevector-ieee-double-set!} @var{bytevector} @var{k} @var{x} @var{endianness}
@math{@var{k}, @dots{}, @var{k}+7} must be valid indices of
@var{bytevector}.

For @func{bytevector-ieee-double-native-set!}, @var{k} must be a
multiple of @math{8}.

These procedures store an @ieee{} 754 double--precision representation
of @var{x} into elements @var{k} through @math{@var{k}+7} of
@var{bytevector}, and return unspecified values.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib bytevector strings
@subsection Operations on strings


This section describes procedures that convert between strings and
bytevectors containing Unicode encodings of those strings.  When
decoding bytevectors, encoding errors are handled as with the
@code{replace} semantics of textual I/O: If an invalid or incomplete
character encoding is encountered, then the replacement character
@code{U+FFFD} is appended to the string being generated, an appropriate
number of bytes are ignored, and decoding continues with the following
bytes.


@deffn Procedure string->utf8 @var{string}
Return a newly allocated (unless empty) bytevector that contains the
@utf{}-8 encoding of the given string.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string->utf16 @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure string->utf16 @var{string} @var{endianness}
If @var{endianness} is specified, it must be the symbol @code{big} or
the symbol @code{little}.  The @func{string->utf16} procedure returns a
newly allocated (unless empty) bytevector that contains the @utf{}-16BE
or @utf{}-16LE encoding of the given string (with no byte--order mark).
If endianness is not specified or is @code{big}, then @utf{}-16BE is
used.  If endianness is @code{little}, then @utf{}-16LE is used.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string->utf32 @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure string->utf32 @var{string} @var{endianness}
If @var{endianness} is specified, it must be the symbol @code{big} or
the symbol @code{little}.  The @func{string->utf32} procedure returns a
newly allocated (unless empty) bytevector that contains the @utf{}-32BE
or @utf{}-32LE encoding of the given string (with no byte mark).  If
endianness is not specified or is @code{big}, then @utf{}-32BE is used.
If endianness is @code{little}, then @utf{}-32LE is used.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure utf8->string @var{bytevector}
Return a newly allocated (unless empty) string whose character sequence
is encoded by the given bytevector.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure utf16->string @var{bytevector} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure utf16->string @var{bytevector} @var{endianness} @var{endianness-mandatory}
@var{endianness} must be the symbol @code{big} or the symbol
@code{little}.

The @func{utf16->string} procedure returns a newly allocated (unless
empty) string whose character sequence is encoded by the given
bytevector.

@var{bytevector} is decoded according to @utf{}-16, @utf{}-16BE,
@utf{}-16LE, or a fourth encoding scheme that differs from all three of
those as follows: If @var{endianness-mandatory} is absent or @false{},
@func{utf16->string} determines the endianness according to a @utf{}-16
BOM at the beginning of @var{bytevector} if a BOM is present; in this
case, the BOM is not decoded as a character.  Also in this case, if no
@utf{}-16 BOM is present, @var{endianness} specifies the endianness of
the encoding.  If @var{endianness-mandatory} is a true value,
@var{endianness} specifies the endianness of the encoding, and any
@utf{}-16 BOM in the encoding is decoded as a regular character.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} A @utf{}-16 BOM is either a sequence of bytes @code{#xFE},
@code{#xFF} specifying @code{big} and @utf{}-16BE, or @code{#xFF},
@code{#xFE} specifying @code{little} and @utf{}-16LE.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure utf32->string @var{bytevector} @var{endianness}
@deffnx Procedure utf32->string @var{bytevector} @var{endianness} @var{endianness-mandatory}
@var{endianness} must be the symbol @code{big} or the symbol
@code{little}.

The @func{utf32->string} procedure returns a newly allocated (unless
empty) string whose character sequence is encoded by the given
bytevector.

@var{bytevector} is decoded according to @utf{}-32, @utf{}-32BE,
@utf{}-32LE, or a fourth encoding scheme that differs from all three of
those as follows: If @var{endianness-mandatory} is absent or @false{},
@func{utf32->string} determines the endianness according to a @utf{}-32
BOM at the beginning of @var{bytevector} if a BOM is present; in this
case, the BOM is not decoded as a character.  Also in this case, if no
@utf{}-32 BOM is present, @var{endianness} specifies the endianness of
the encoding.  If @var{endianness-mandatory} is a true value,
@var{endianness} specifies the endianness of the encoding, and any
@utf{}-32 BOM in the encoding is decoded as a regular character.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} A @utf{}-32 BOM is either a sequence of bytes @code{#x00},
@code{#x00}, @code{#xFE}, @code{#xFF} specifying @code{big} and
@utf{}-32BE, or @code{#xFF}, @code{#xFE}, @code{#x00}, @code{#x00},
specifying @code{little} and @utf{}-32LE.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib list
@section List utilities


This chapter describes the @rsixlibrary{lists} library, which contains
various useful procedures that operate on lists.


@deffn Procedure find @var{proc} @var{list}
@var{proc} should accept one argument and return a single value.
@var{proc} should not mutate @var{list}.  The @func{find} procedure
applies @var{proc} to the elements of @var{list} in order.  If
@var{proc} returns a true value for an element, @func{find} immediately
returns that element.  If @var{proc} returns @false{} for all elements
of the list, @func{find} returns @false{}.  @var{proc} is always called
in the same dynamic environment as @func{find} itself.

@example
(find even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9))
@result{} 4

(find even? '(3 1 5 1 5 9))
@result{} #f
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
that @var{list} is a chain of pairs up to the found element, or that it
is indeed a list if no element is found.  It should not check that it is
a chain of pairs beyond the found element.  The implementation must
check the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying
it as described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure for-all @var{proc} @vari{list} @varii{list} @dots{} @varn{list}
@deffnx Procedure exists @var{proc} @vari{list} @varii{list} @dots{} @varn{list}
The @var{list}s should all have the same length, and @var{proc} should
accept @math{n} arguments and return a single value.  @var{proc} should
not mutate the @var{list} arguments.

For natural numbers @math{i = 0, 1, @dots{}}, the @func{for-all}
procedure successively applies @var{proc} to arguments @math{x_i^1
@dots{} x_i^n}, where @math{x_i^j} is the @math{i}-th element of
@var{listj}, until @false{} is returned.

If @var{proc} returns true values for all but the last element of
@vari{list}, @func{for-all} performs a tail call of @var{proc} on the
@math{k}-th elements, where @math{k} is the length of @vari{list}.  If
@var{proc} returns @false{} on any set of elements, @func{for-all}
returns @false{} after the first such application of @var{proc}.  If the
@var{list}s are all empty, @func{for-all} returns @true{}.

For natural numbers @math{i = 0, 1, @dots{}}, the @func{exists}
procedure applies @var{proc} successively to arguments @math{x_i^1
@dots{} x_i^n}, where @math{x_i^j} is the @math{i}-th element of
@var{listj}, until a true value is returned.

If @var{proc} returns @false{} for all but the last elements of the
@var{list}s, @func{exists} performs a tail call of @var{proc} on the
@emph{k}th elements, where @emph{k} is the length of @vari{list}.  If
@var{proc} returns a true value on any set of elements, @func{exists}
returns that value after the first such application of @var{proc}.  If
the @var{list}s are all empty, @func{exists} returns @false{}.

@var{proc} is always called in the same dynamic environment as
@func{for-all} or, respectively, @func{exists} itself.

@example
(for-all even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9))
@result{} #f

(for-all even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9 . 2))
@result{} #f

(for-all even? '(2 4 14))
@result{} #t

(for-all even? '(2 4 14 . 9))
@error{} exception &assertion

(for-all (lambda (n) (and (even? n) n))
         '(2 4 14))
@result{} 14

(for-all < '(1 2 3) '(2 3 4))
@result{} #t

(for-all < '(1 2 4) '(2 3 4))
@result{} #f

(exists even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9))
@result{} #t

(exists even? '(3 1 1 5 9))
@result{} #f

(exists even? '(3 1 1 5 9 . 2))
@error{} exception &assertion

(exists (lambda (n) (and (even? n) n))
        '(2 1 4 14))
@result{} 2

(exists < '(1 2 4) '(2 3 4))
@result{} #t

(exists > '(1 2 3) '(2 3 4))
@result{} #f
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
that the @var{list}s are chains of pairs to the extent necessary to
determine the return value.  If this requires traversing the lists
entirely, the implementation should check that the @var{list}s all have
the same length.  If not, it should not check that the @var{list}s are
chains of pairs beyond the traversal.  The implementation must check the
restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying it as
described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure filter @var{proc} @var{list}
@deffnx Procedure partition @var{proc} @var{list}
@var{proc} should accept one argument and return a single value.
@var{proc} should not mutate @var{list}.

The @func{filter} procedure applies @var{proc} to each element of
@var{list} and returns a list of the elements of @var{list} for which
@var{proc} returned a true value.

The @func{partition} procedure also applies @var{proc} to each element
of @var{list}, but returns two values, the first one a list of the
elements of @var{list} for which @var{proc} returned a true value, and
the second a list of the elements of @var{list} for which @var{proc}
returned @false{}.

In both cases, the elements of the result list(s) are in the same order
as they appear in the input list.  @var{proc} is always called in the
same dynamic environment as @func{filter} or, respectively,
@func{partition} itself.  If multiple returns occur from @func{filter}
or @func{partitions}, the return values returned by earlier returns are
not mutated.

@example
(filter even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6))
@result{} (4 2 6)

(partition even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6))
@result{} (4 2 6) (3 1 1 5 9)   ; two values
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying it as
described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure fold-left @var{combine} @var{nil} @vari{list} @varii{list} @dots{} @varn{list}
The @var{list}s should all have the same length.  @var{combine} must be
a procedure; it should accept one more argument than there are
@var{list}s and return a single value; it should not mutate the
@var{list} arguments.

The @func{fold-left} procedure iterates the @var{combine} procedure over
an accumulator value and the elements of the @var{list}s from left to
right, starting with an accumulator value of @var{nil}.

More specifically, @func{fold-left} returns @var{nil} if the @var{list}s
are empty.  If they are not empty, @var{combine} is first applied to
@var{nil} and the respective first elements of the @var{list}s in order.
The result becomes the new accumulator value, and @var{combine} is
applied to the new accumulator value and the respective next elements of
the @var{list}.  This step is repeated until the end of the list is
reached; then the accumulator value is returned.

@var{combine} is always called in the same dynamic environment as
@func{fold-left} itself.

@example
(fold-left + 0 '(1 2 3 4 5))
@result{} 15

(fold-left (lambda (a e)
             (cons e a))
           '()
           '(1 2 3 4 5))
@result{} (5 4 3 2 1)

(fold-left (lambda (count x)
             (if (odd? x)
                 (+ count 1)
               count))
           0
           '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6 5 3))
@result{} 7

(fold-left (lambda (max-len s)
             (max max-len (string-length s)))
           0
           '("longest" "long" "longer"))
@result{} 7

(fold-left cons '(q) '(a b c))
@result{} ((((q) . a) . b) . c)

(fold-left + 0 '(1 2 3) '(4 5 6))
@result{} 21
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation should
check that the @var{list}s all have the same length.  The implementation
must check the restrictions on @var{combine} to the extent performed by
applying it as described.  An implementation may check whether
@var{combine} is an appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure fold-right @var{combine} @var{nil} @vari{list} @varii{list} @dots{} @varn{list}
The @var{list}s should all have the same length.  @var{combine} must be
a procedure; it should accept one more argument than there are
@var{list}s and return a single value; @var{combine} should not mutate
the @var{list} arguments.

The @func{fold-right} procedure iterates the @var{combine} procedure
over the elements of the @var{list}s from right to left and an
accumulator value, starting with an accumulator value of @var{nil}.

More specifically, @func{fold-right} returns @var{nil} if the
@var{list}s are empty.  If they are not empty, @var{combine} is first
applied to the respective last elements of the @var{list}s in order and
@var{nil}.  The result becomes the new accumulator value, and
@var{combine} is applied to the respective previous elements of the
@var{list}s and the new accumulator value.  This step is repeated until
the beginning of the list is reached; then the accumulator value is
returned.

@var{proc} is always called in the same dynamic environment as
@func{fold-right} itself.

@example
(fold-right + 0 '(1 2 3 4 5))
@result{} 15

(fold-right cons '() '(1 2 3 4 5))
@result{} (1 2 3 4 5)

(fold-right (lambda (x l)
              (if (odd? x) (cons x l) l))
            '()
            '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6 5))
@result{} (3 1 1 5 9 5)

(fold-right cons '(q) '(a b c))
@result{} (a b c q)

(fold-right + 0 '(1 2 3) '(4 5 6))
@result{} 21
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation should
check that the @var{list}s all have the same length.  The implementation
must check the restrictions on @var{combine} to the extent performed by
applying it as described.  An implementation may check whether
@var{combine} is an appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure remp @var{proc} @var{list}
@deffnx Procedure remove @var{obj} @var{list}
@deffnx Procedure remv @var{obj} @var{list}
@deffnx Procedure remq @var{obj} @var{list}
@var{proc} should accept one argument and return a single value.
@var{proc} should not mutate @var{list}.

Each of these procedures returns a list of the elements of @var{list}
that do not satisfy a given condition.

The @func{remp} procedure applies @var{proc} to each element of
@var{list} and returns a list of the elements of @var{list} for which
@var{proc} returned @false{}.  @var{proc} is always called in the same
dynamic environment as @func{remp} itself.

The @func{remove}, @func{remv}, and @func{remq} procedures return a list
of the elements that are not @var{obj}.  The @func{remq} procedure uses
@func{eq?} to compare @var{obj} with the elements of @var{list}, while
@func{remv} uses @func{eqv?} and @func{remove} uses @func{equal?}.

The elements of the result list are in the same order as they appear in
the input list.  If multiple returns occur from @func{remp}, the return
values returned by earlier returns are not mutated.

@example
(remp even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6 5))
@result{} (3 1 1 5 9 5)

(remove 1 '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6 5))
@result{} (3 4 5 9 2 6 5)

(remv 1 '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6 5))
@result{} (3 4 5 9 2 6 5)

(remq 'foo '(bar foo baz))
@result{} (bar baz)
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying it as
described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure memp @var{proc} @var{list}
@deffnx Procedure member @var{obj} @var{list}
@deffnx Procedure memv @var{obj} @var{list}
@deffnx Procedure memq @var{obj} @var{list}
@var{proc} should accept one argument and return a single value.
@var{proc} should not mutate @var{list}.

These procedures return the first sublist of @var{list} whose car
satisfies a given condition, where the sublists of @var{lists} are the
lists returned by @code{(list-tail @var{list} @var{k})} for @var{k} less
than the length of @var{list}.

The @func{memp} procedure applies @var{proc} to the cars of the sublists
of @var{list} until it finds one for which @var{proc} returns a true
value.  @var{proc} is always called in the same dynamic environment as
@func{memp} itself.

The @func{member}, @func{memv}, and @func{memq} procedures look for the
first occurrence of @var{obj}.  If @var{list} does not contain an
element satisfying the condition, then @false{} (not the empty list) is
returned.  The @func{member} procedure uses @func{equal?} to compare
@var{obj} with the elements of @var{list}, while @func{memv} uses
@func{eqv?} and @func{memq} uses @func{eq?}.

@example
(memp even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 6 5))
@result{} (4 1 5 9 2 6 5)

(memq 'a '(a b c))
@result{} (a b c)

(memq 'b '(a b c))
@result{} (b c)

(memq 'a '(b c d))
@result{} #f

(memq (list 'a) '(b (a) c))
@result{} #f

(member (list 'a) '(b (a) c))
@result{} ((a) c)

(memq 101 '(100 101 102))
@result{} unspecified

(memv 101 '(100 101 102))
@result{} (101 102)
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
that @var{list} is a chain of pairs up to the found element, or that it
is indeed a list if no element is found.  It should not check that it is
a chain of pairs beyond the found element.  The implementation must
check the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying
it as described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure assp @var{proc} @var{alist}
@deffnx Procedure assoc @var{obj} @var{alist}
@deffnx Procedure assv @var{obj} @var{alist}
@deffnx Procedure assq @var{obj} @var{alist}
@var{alist} (for ``association list'') should be a list of pairs.
@var{proc} should accept one argument and return a single value.
@var{Proc} should not mutate @var{alist}.

These procedures find the first pair in @var{alist} whose car field
satisfies a given condition, and returns that pair without traversing
@var{alist} further.  If no pair in @var{alist} satisfies the condition,
then @false{} is returned.

The @func{assp} procedure successively applies @var{proc} to the car
fields of @var{alist} and looks for a pair for which it returns a true
value.  @var{proc} is always called in the same dynamic environment as
@func{assp} itself.

The @func{assoc}, @func{assv}, and @func{assq} procedures look for a
pair that has @var{obj} as its car.  The @func{assoc} procedure uses
@func{equal?} to compare @var{obj} with the car fields of the pairs in
@var{alist}, while @func{assv} uses @func{eqv?} and @func{assq} uses
@func{eq?}.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
that @var{alist} is a chain of pairs containing pairs up to the found
pair, or that it is indeed a list of pairs if no element is found.  It
should not check that it is a chain of pairs beyond the found element.
The implementation must check the restrictions on @var{proc} to the
extent performed by applying it as described.  An implementation may
check whether @var{proc} is an appropriate argument before applying it.

@example
(define d '((3 a) (1 b) (4 c)))

(assp even? d)
@result{} (4 c)

(assp odd? d)
@result{} (3 a)

(define e '((a 1) (b 2) (c 3)))

(assq 'a e)
@result{} (a 1)

(assq 'b e)
@result{} (b 2)

(assq 'd e)
@result{} #f

(assq (list 'a) '(((a)) ((b)) ((c))))
@result{} #f

(assoc (list 'a) '(((a)) ((b)) ((c))))
@result{} ((a))

(assq 5 '((2 3) (5 7) (11 13)))
@result{} unspecified

(assv 5 '((2 3) (5 7) (11 13)))
@result{} (5 7)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {cons*} @vari{obj} @dots{} @varn{obj} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {cons*} @var{obj}
If called with at least two arguments, @func{cons*} returns a freshly
allocated chain of pairs whose cars are @vari{obj}, @dots{}, @varn{obj},
and whose last cdr is @var{obj}.  If called with only one argument,
@func{cons*} returns that argument.

@example
(cons* 1 2 '(3 4 5))
@result{} (1 2 3 4 5)

(cons* 1 2 3)
@result{} (1 2 . 3)

(cons* 1)
@result{} 1
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib sorting
@section Sorting


This chapter describes the @rsixlibrary{sorting} library for sorting
lists and vectors.


@deffn Procedure list-sort @var{proc list}
@deffnx Procedure vector-sort @var{proc vector}
@var{proc} should accept any two elements of @var{list} or @var{vector},
and should not have any side effects.  @var{proc} should return a true
value when its first argument is strictly less than its second, and
@false{} otherwise.

The @func{list-sort} and @func{vector-sort} procedures perform a stable
sort of @var{list} or @var{vector} in ascending order according to
@var{proc}, without changing @var{list} or @var{vector} in any way.  The
@func{list-sort} procedure returns a list, and @func{vector-sort}
returns a vector.

The results may be @func{eq?} to the argument when the argument is
already sorted, and the result of @func{list-sort} may share structure
with a tail of the original list.

The sorting algorithm performs @math{O(n log n)} calls to @var{proc}
where @math{n} is the length of @var{list} or @var{vector}, and all
arguments passed to @var{proc} are elements of the list or vector being
sorted, but the pairing of arguments and the sequencing of calls to
@var{proc} are not specified.  If multiple returns occur from
@func{list-sort} or @func{vector-sort}, the return values returned by
earlier returns are not mutated.

@example
(list-sort < '(3 5 2 1))        @result{} (1 2 3 5)
(vector-sort < '#(3 5 2 1))     @result{} #(1 2 3 5)
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying it as
described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure vector-sort! @var{proc} @var{vector}
@var{proc} should accept any two elements of the vector, and should not
have any side effects.  @var{proc} should return a true value when its
first argument is strictly less than its second, and @false{}
otherwise.

The @func{vector-sort!} procedure destructively sorts @var{vector} in
ascending order according to @var{proc}.  The sorting algorithm performs
@math{O(n^2)} calls to @var{proc} where @math{n} is the length of
@var{vector}, and all arguments passed to @var{proc} are elements of the
vector being sorted, but the pairing of arguments and the sequencing of
calls to @var{proc} are not specified.  The sorting algorithm may be
unstable.  The procedure returns unspecified values.

@example
(define v (vector 3 5 2 1))
(vector-sort! < v)              @result{} unspecified
v                               @result{} #(1 2 3 5)
@end example

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{proc} to the extent performed by applying it as
described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib control
@section Control structures


This chapter describes the @rsixlibrary{control} library, which provides
useful control structures.


@deffn Syntax when @meta{test} @hyperi{expression} @hyperii{expression} @dots{}
@deffnx Syntax unless @meta{test} @hyperi{expression} @hyperii{expression} @dots{}
@meta{test} must be an expression.

A @func{when} expression is evaluated by evaluating the @meta{test}
expression.  If @meta{test} evaluates to a true value, the remaining
@hyper{expression}s are evaluated in order, and the results of the last
@hyper{expression} are returned as the results of the entire @func{when}
expression.  Otherwise, the @func{when} expression returns unspecified
values.

An @func{unless} expression is evaluated by evaluating the @meta{test}
expression.  If @meta{test} evaluates to @false{}, the remaining
@hyper{expression}s are evaluated in order, and the results of the last
@hyper{expression} are returned as the results of the entire
@func{unless} expression.  Otherwise, the @func{unless} expression
returns unspecified values.

The final @hyper{expression} is in tail context if the @func{when} or
@func{unless} form is itself in tail context.

@example
(when (> 3 2) 'greater)         @result{} greater
(when (< 3 2) 'greater)         @result{} #<unspecified>
(unless (> 3 2) 'less)          @result{} #<unspecified>
(unless (< 3 2) 'less)          @result{} less
@end example

The @func{when} and @func{unless} expressions are derived forms.  They
could be defined by the following macros:

@example
(define-syntax when
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((when test result1 result2 ...)
     (if test
         (begin result1 result2 ...)))))

(define-syntax unless
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((unless test result1 result2 ...)
     (if (not test)
         (begin result1 result2 ...)))))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax do ((@hyperi{variable} @hyperi{init} @hyperi{step}) @dots{}) (@meta{test} @hyper{expression} @dots{}) @meta{command} @dots{}
The @meta{init}s, @hyper{step}s, @hyper{test}s, and @hyper{command}s
must be expressions.  The @meta{variable}s must be pairwise distinct
variables.

The @func{do} expression is an iteration construct.  It specifies a set
of variables to be bound, how they are to be initialized at the start,
and how they are to be updated on each iteration.

A @func{do} expression is evaluated as follows: The @meta{init}
expressions are evaluated (in some unspecified order), the
@meta{variable}s are bound to fresh locations, the results of the
@meta{init} expressions are stored in the bindings of the
@meta{variable}s, and then the iteration phase begins.

Each iteration begins by evaluating @meta{test}; if the result is
@false{}, then the @meta{command}s are evaluated in order for effect,
the @meta{step} expressions are evaluated in some unspecified order, the
@meta{variable}s are bound to fresh locations holding the results, and
the next iteration begins.

If @meta{test} evaluates to a true value, the @meta{expression}s are
evaluated from left to right and the values of the last
@meta{expression} are returned.  If no @hyper{expression}s are present,
then the @func{do} expression returns unspecified values.

The region consists of the entire @func{do} expression except for the
@meta{init}s.

A @meta{step} may be omitted, in which case the effect is the same as if
@code{(@meta{variable} @hyper{init} @hyper{variable})} had been written
instead of @code{(@meta{variable} @hyper{init})}.

If a @func{do} expression appears in a tail context, the
@meta{expression}s are a @hyper{tail sequence} in the sense of report
section @ref{baselib tail call}, i.e., the last @meta{expression} is
also in a tail context.

@example
(do ((vec (make-vector 5))
     (i 0 (+ i 1)))
    ((= i 5) vec)
  (vector-set! vec i i))
@result{} #(0 1 2 3 4)

(let ((x '(1 3 5 7 9)))
  (do ((x x (cdr x))
       (sum 0 (+ sum (car x))))
      ((null? x) sum)))
@result{} 25
@end example

The following definition of @func{do} uses a trick to expand the
variable clauses.

@example
(define-syntax do
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((do ((var init step ...) ...)
         (test expr ...)
         command ...)
     (letrec
       ((loop
         (lambda (var ...)
           (if test
               (begin
                 #f ; avoid empty begin
                 expr ...)
               (begin
                 command
                 ...
                 (loop (do "step" var step ...)
                       ...))))))
       (loop init ...)))
    ((do "step" x)
     x)
    ((do "step" x y)
     y)))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax case-lambda @meta{case-lambda clause} @dots{}
Each @meta{case-lambda clause} must be of the form:

@example
(@meta{formals} @hyper{body})
@end example

@meta{formals} must be as in a @func{lambda} form (@ref{baselib
expressions procedures}), and @meta{body} is as described in report
section @ref{baselib bodies}.

A @func{case-lambda} expression evaluates to a procedure.  This
procedure, when applied, tries to match its arguments to the
@meta{case-lambda clause}s in order.  The arguments match a clause if
one of the following conditions is fulfilled:

@itemize
@item
@meta{formals} has the form @code{(@hyper{variable} @dots{})} and the
number of arguments is the same as the number of formal parameters in
@meta{formals}.

@item
@meta{formals} has the form:

@example
(@hyperi{variable} @dots{} @hypern{variable} . @meta{variable_(n+1)})
@end example

@noindent
and the number of arguments is at least @math{n}.

@item
@meta{formals} has the form @code{@hyper{variable}}.
@end itemize

For the first clause matched by the arguments, the variables of the
@meta{formals} are bound to fresh locations containing the argument
values in the same arrangement as with @func{lambda}.

The last expression of a @meta{body} in a @func{case-lambda} expression
is in tail context.

If the arguments match none of the clauses, an exception with condition
type @code{&assertion} is raised.

@example
(define foo
  (case-lambda
   (() 'zero)
   ((x) (list 'one x))
   ((x y) (list 'two x y))
   ((a b c d . e) (list 'four a b c d e))
   (rest (list 'rest rest))))

(foo)                   @result{} zero
(foo 1)                 @result{} (one 1)
(foo 1 2)               @result{} (two 1 2)
(foo 1 2 3)             @result{} (rest (1 2 3))
(foo 1 2 3 4)           @result{} (four 1 2 3 4 ())
@end example

The @func{case-lambda} keyword can be defined in terms of @func{lambda}
by the following macros:

@example
(define-syntax case-lambda
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ (fmls b1 b2 ...))
     (lambda fmls b1 b2 ...))
    ((_ (fmls b1 b2 ...) ...)
     (lambda args
       (let ((n (length args)))
         (case-lambda-help args n
           (fmls b1 b2 ...) ...))))))

(define-syntax case-lambda-help
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ args n)
     (assertion-violation #f
       "unexpected number of arguments"))
    ((_ args n ((x ...) b1 b2 ...) more ...)
     (if (= n (length '(x ...)))
         (apply (lambda (x ...) b1 b2 ...) args)
         (case-lambda-help args n more ...)))
    ((_ args n ((x1 x2 ... . r) b1 b2 ...) more ...)
     (if (>= n (length '(x1 x2 ...)))
         (apply (lambda (x1 x2 ... . r) b1 b2 ...)
                   args)
         (case-lambda-help args n more ...)))
    ((_ args n (r b1 b2 ...) more ...)
     (apply (lambda r b1 b2 ...) args))))
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib records
@section Records


This section describes abstractions for creating new data types
representing records.


@menu
* stdlib records intro::                Introduction.
* stdlib records mutability::           Mutability and equivalence
                                        of records.
* stdlib records syntactic layer::      Syntactic layer.
* stdlib records procedural layer::     Procedural layer.
* stdlib records inspection::           Inspection.
@end menu

@c page
@node stdlib records intro
@subsection Introduction


A record is a compound data structure with a fixed number of components,
called @emph{fields}.  Each record has an associated type specified by a
@emph{record-type descriptor}, which is an object that specifies the
fields of the record and various other properties that all records of
that type share.  Record objects are created by a @emph{record
constructor}, a procedure that creates a fresh record object and
initializes its fields to values.  Records of different types can be
distinguished from each other and from other types of objects by
@emph{record predicates}.  A record predicate returns @true{} when
passed a record of the type specified by the record--type descriptor and
@false{} otherwise.  An @emph{accessor} extracts from a record the
component associated with a field, and a @emph{mutator} changes the
component to a different value.

Record types can be extended via single inheritance, allowing record
types to model hierarchies that occur in applications like algebraic
data types as well as single--inheritance class systems.  If a record
type @var{t} extends another record type @var{p}, each record of type
@var{t} is also a record of type @var{p}, and the predicate, accessors,
and mutators applicable to a record of type @var{p} are also applicable
to a record of type @var{t}.  The extension relationship is transitive
in the sense that a type extends its parent's parent, if any, and so on.
A record type that does not extend another record type is called a
@emph{base record type}.

A record type can be @emph{sealed} to prevent it from being extended.
Moreover, a record type can be @emph{nongenerative}, i.e., it is
globally identified by a ``uid'', and new, compatible definitions of a
nongenerative record type with the same uid as a previous always yield
the same record type.

The record mechanism spans three libraries:

@table @rsixlibrary
@item records syntactic
library, a syntactic layer for defining a record type and associated
constructor, predicate, accessor, and mutators,

@item records procedural
library, a procedural layer for creating and manipulating record types
and creating constructors, predicates, accessors, and mutators;

@item records inspection
library, a set of inspection procedures.
@end table

The inspection procedures allow programs to obtain from a record
instance a descriptor for the type and from there obtain access to the
fields of the record instance. This facility allows the creation of
portable printers and inspectors.  A program may prevent access to a
record's type (and thereby protect the information stored in the record
from the inspection mechanism) by declaring the type opaque.  Thus,
opacity as presented here can be used to enforce abstraction barriers.

Any of the standard types mentioned in this report may or may not be
implemented as an opaque record type.  Thus, it may be possible to use
inspection on objects of the standard types.

The procedural layer is particularly useful for writing interpreters
that construct host--compatible record types.  It may also serve as a
target for expansion of the syntactic layers.  The record operations
provided through the procedural layer may, however, be less efficient
than the operations provided through the syntactic layer, which is
designed to allow expand--time determination of record--instance sizes
and field offsets.  Therefore, alternative implementations of syntactic
record--type definition should, when possible, expand into the syntactic
layer rather than the procedural layer.

The syntactic layer is used more commonly and therefore described first.
This chapter uses the @var{rtd} and @var{constructor-descriptor}
parameter names for arguments that must be record-type descriptors and
constructor descriptors, respectively.



@c page
@node stdlib records mutability
@subsection Mutability and equivalence of records


The fields of a record type are designated @emph{mutable} or
@emph{immutable}.  Correspondingly, a record type with no mutable field
is called @emph{immutable}, and all records of that type are immutable
objects.  All other record types are @emph{mutable}, and so are their
records.

Each call to a record constructor returns a new record with a fresh
location (@ref{lang basic storage model}).  Consequently, for two
records @vari{obj} and @varii{obj}, the return value of @code{(eqv?
@vari{obj} @varii{obj})}, as well as the return value of @code{(eq?
@vari{obj} @varii{obj})}, adheres to the following criteria
(@ref{baselib predicates}):

@itemize
@item
If @vari{obj} and @varii{obj} have different record types (i.e., their
record--type descriptors are not @func{eqv?}), @func{eqv?}  returns
@false{}.

@item
If @vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are both records of the same record type,
and are the results of two separate calls to record constructors, then
@func{eqv?} returns @false{}.
@item
If @vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are both the result of a single call to a
record constructor, then @func{eqv?} returns @true{}.

@item
If @vari{obj} and @varii{obj} are both records of the same record type,
where applying an accessor to both yields results for which @func{eqv?}
returns @false{}, then @func{eqv?} returns @false{}.
@end itemize

@c page
@node stdlib records syntactic layer
@subsection Syntactic layer


The syntactic layer is provided by the @rsixlibrary{records syntactic}
library.  Some details of the specification are explained in terms of
the specification of the procedural layer.  @ref{stdlib records
procedural layer, Procedural layer}

The record--type--defining form @func{define-record-type} is a
definition and can appear anywhere any other @meta{definition} can
appear.


@deffn Syntax define-record-type @meta{name spec} @arbno{@hyper{record clause}}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} fields
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} mutable
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} immutable
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} parent
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} protocol
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} sealed
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} opaque
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} nongenerative
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} parent-rtd
A @func{define-record-type} form defines a record type along with
associated constructor descriptor and constructor, predicate, field
accessors, and field mutators.  The @func{define-record-type} form
expands into a set of definitions in the environment where
@func{define-record-type} appears; hence, it is possible to refer to the
bindings (except for that of the record type itself) recursively.

The @meta{name spec} specifies the names of the record type,
constructor, and predicate. It must take one of the following forms:

@example
(@meta{record name} @hyper{constructor name} @hyper{predicate name})
@meta{record name}
@end example

@meta{record name}, @hyper{constructor name}, and @hyper{predicate name}
must all be identifiers.

@meta{record name}, taken as a symbol, becomes the name of the record
type.  (See the description of @func{make-record-type-descriptor}
below.)  Additionally, it is bound by this definition to an expand--time
or run--time representation of the record type and can be used as parent
name in syntactic record--type definitions that extend this
definition. It can also be used as a handle to gain access to the
underlying record--type descriptor and constructor descriptor (see
@func{record-type-descriptor} and @func{record-constructor-descriptor}
below).

@meta{constructor name} is defined by this definition to be a
constructor for the defined record type, with a protocol specified by
the @code{protocol} clause, or, in its absence, using a default
protocol.  For details, see the description of the @code{protocol}
clause below.

@meta{predicate name} is defined by this definition to a predicate for
the defined record type.

The second form of @meta{name spec} is an abbreviation for the first
form, where the name of the constructor is generated by prefixing the
record name with @code{make-}, and the predicate name is generated by
adding a question mark (@code{?}) to the end of the record name. For
example, if the record name is @code{frob}, the name of the constructor
is @func{make-frob}, and the predicate name is @func{frob?}.

Each @meta{record clause} must take one of the following forms; it is a
syntax violation if multiple @meta{record clause}s of the same kind
appear in a @func{define-record-type} form.
@end deffn


@deffn {Auxiliary Syntax} fields @arbno{@meta{field spec}}
Each @meta{field spec} has one of the following forms

@example
(immutable @meta{field name} @hyper{accessor name})
(mutable @meta{field name}
         @meta{accessor name} @hyper{mutator name})
(immutable @meta{field name})
(mutable @meta{field name})
@meta{field name}
@end example

@meta{field name}, @hyper{accessor name}, and @hyper{mutator name} must
all be identifiers.  The first form declares an immutable field called
@meta{field name}, with the corresponding accessor named @meta{accessor
name}.  The second form declares a mutable field called @meta{field
name}, with the corresponding accessor named @meta{accessor name}, and
with the corresponding mutator named @meta{mutator name}.

If @meta{field spec} takes the third or fourth form, the accessor name
is generated by appending the record name and field name with a hyphen
separator, and the mutator name (for a mutable field) is generated by
adding a @code{-set!} suffix to the accessor name.  For example, if the
record name is @code{frob} and the field name is @code{widget}, the
accessor name is @func{frob-widget} and the mutator name is
@func{frob-widget-set!}.

If @meta{field spec} is just a @hyper{field name} form, it is an
abbreviation for @code{(immutable @meta{field name})}.

The @meta{field name}s become, as symbols, the names of the fields in
the record--type descriptor being created, in the same order.

The @code{fields} clause may be absent; this is equivalent to an empty
@code{fields} clause.
@end deffn


@deffn {Auxiliary Syntax} parent @meta{parent name}
Specifies that the record type is to have parent type @hyper{parent
name}, where @meta{parent name} is the @hyper{record name} of a record
type previously defined using @func{define-record-type}.  The
record--type definition associated with @meta{parent name} must not be
sealed.  If no @code{parent} clause and no @code{parent-rtd} (see below)
clause is present, the record type is a base type.
@end deffn


@deffn {Auxiliary Syntax} protocol @meta{expression}
@meta{expression} is evaluated in the same environment as the
@func{define-record-type} form, and must evaluate to a protocol
appropriate for the record type being defined.

The protocol is used to create a record--constructor descriptor as
described below.  If no @code{protocol} clause is specified, a
constructor descriptor is still created using a default protocol.  The
clause can be absent only if the record type being defined has no parent
type, or if the parent definition does not specify a protocol.
@end deffn


@deffn {Auxiliary Syntax} sealed #t
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} sealed #f
If this option is specified with operand @true{}, the defined record
type is sealed, i.e., no extensions of the record type can be created.
If this option is specified with operand @false{}, or is absent, the
defined record type is not sealed.
@end deffn


@deffn {Auxiliary Syntax} opaque #t
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} opaque #f
If this option is specified with operand @true{}, or if an opaque parent
record type is specified, the defined record type is opaque.  Otherwise,
the defined record type is not opaque.  See the specification of
@code{record-rtd} below for details.
@end deffn


@deffn {Auxiliary Syntax} nongenerative @meta{uid}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} nongenerative
This specifies that the record type is nongenerative with uid
@meta{uid}, which must be an @hyper{identifier}.  If @meta{uid} is
absent, a unique uid is generated at macro--expansion time.  If two
record--type definitions specify the same @var{uid}, then the
record--type definitions should be equivalent, i.e., the implied
arguments to @func{make-record-type-descriptor} must be equivalent as
described under @func{make-record-type-descriptor}.

If this condition is not met, it is either considered a syntax violation
or an exception with condition type @code{&assertion} is raised.  If the
condition is met, a single record type is generated for both
definitions.

In the absence of a @code{nongenerative} clause, a new record type is
generated every time a @func{define-record-type} form is evaluated:

@example
(let ((f (lambda (x)
           (define-record-type r ...)
           (if x r? (make-r ...)))))
  ((f #t) (f #f)))
@result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Auxiliary Syntax} parent-rtd @meta{parent rtd} @hyper{parent cd}
Specifies that the record type is to have its parent type specified by
@meta{parent rtd}, which should be an expression evaluating to a
record--type descriptor, and @meta{parent cd}, which should be an
expression evaluating to a constructor descriptor (see below).  Either
@meta{parent rtd} or @meta{parent cd} can evaluate to @false{}.  The
record--type definition associated with the value of @meta{parent rtd}
must not be sealed.  Moreover, a record--type definition must not have
both a @code{parent} and a @code{parent-rtd} clause.
@end deffn


@quotation
@emph{Note:} The syntactic layer is designed to allow record--instance
sizes and field offsets to be determined at expand time, i.e., by a
macro definition of @func{define-record-type}, as long as the parent (if
any) is known.  Implementations that take advantage of this may generate
less efficient constructor, accessor, and mutator code when the
@code{parent-rtd} clause is used, since the type of the parent is
generally not known until run time.  The @code{parent} clause should
therefore be used instead when possible.
@end quotation

All bindings created by @func{define-record-type} (for the record type,
the constructor, the predicate, the accessors, and the mutators) must
have names that are pairwise distinct.

The constructor created by a @func{define-record-type} form is a
procedure as follows:

@itemize
@item
If there is no @code{parent} clause and no @code{protocol} clause, the
constructor accepts as many arguments as there are fields, in the same
order as they appear in the @code{fields} clause, and returns a record
object with the fields initialized to the corresponding arguments.

@item
If there is no @code{parent} or @code{parent-rtd} clause and a
@code{protocol} clause, the protocol expression must evaluate to a
procedure that accepts a single argument.  The protocol procedure is
called once during the evaluation of the @func{define-record-type} form
with a procedure @var{p} as its argument.  It should return a procedure,
which will become the constructor bound to @meta{constructor name}.  The
procedure @var{p} accepts as many arguments as there are fields, in the
same order as they appear in the @code{fields} clause, and returns a
record object with the fields initialized to the corresponding
arguments.

The constructor returned by the protocol procedure can accept an
arbitrary number of arguments, and should call @var{p} once to construct
a record object, and return that record object.

For example, the following protocol expression for a record--type
definition with three fields creates a constructor that accepts values
for all fields, and initialized them in the reverse order of the
arguments:

@example
(lambda (p)
  (lambda (v1 v2 v3)
    (p v3 v2 v1)))
@end example

@item
If there is both a @code{parent} clause and a @code{protocol} clause,
then the protocol procedure is called once with a procedure @var{n} as
its argument.  As in the previous case, the protocol procedure should
return a procedure, which will become the constructor bound to
@meta{constructor name}.  However, @var{n} is different from @var{p} in
the previous case: It accepts arguments corresponding to the arguments
of the constructor of the parent type.  It then returns a procedure
@var{p} that accepts as many arguments as there are (additional) fields
in this type, in the same order as in the @code{fields} clause, and
returns a record object with the fields of the parent record types
initialized according to their constructors and the arguments to
@var{n}, and the fields of this record type initialized to its arguments
of @var{p}.

The constructor returned by the protocol procedure can accept an
arbitrary number of arguments, and should call @var{n} once to construct
the procedure @var{p}, and call @var{p} once to create the record
object, and finally return that record object.

For example, the following protocol expression assumes that the
constructor of the parent type takes three arguments:

@example
(lambda (n)
  (lambda (v1 v2 v3 x1 x2 x3 x4)
    (let ((p (n v1 v2 v3)))
      (p x1 x2 x3 x4))))
@end example

The resulting constructor accepts seven arguments, and initializes the
fields of the parent types according to the constructor of the parent
type, with @var{v1}, @var{v2}, and @var{v3} as arguments.  It also
initializes the fields of this record type to the values of @var{x1},
@dots{}, @var{x4}.

@item
If there is a @code{parent} clause, but no @code{protocol} clause, then
the parent type must not have a @code{protocol} clause itself.  The
constructor bound to @meta{constructor name} is a procedure that accepts
arguments corresponding to the parent types' constructor first, and then
one argument for each field in the same order as in the @code{fields}
clause.  The constructor returns a record object with the fields
initialized to the corresponding arguments.

@item
If there is a @code{parent-rtd} clause, then the constructor is as with
a @code{parent} clause, except that the constructor of the parent type
is determined by the constructor descriptor of the @code{parent-rtd}
clause.
@end itemize

A protocol may perform other actions consistent with the requirements
described above, including mutation of the new record or other side
effects, before returning the record.

Any definition that takes advantage of implicit naming for the
constructor, predicate, accessor, and mutator names can be rewritten
trivially to a definition that specifies all names explicitly. For
example, the implicit--naming record definition:

@example
(define-record-type frob
  (fields (mutable widget))
  (protocol
    (lambda (p)
      (lambda (n) (p (make-widget n))))))
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to the following explicit--naming record definition.

@example
(define-record-type (frob make-frob frob?)
  (fields (mutable widget
                   frob-widget
                   frob-widget-set!))
  (protocol
    (lambda (p)
      (lambda (n) (p (make-widget n))))))
@end example

Also, the implicit--naming record definition:

@example
(define-record-type point (fields x y))
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to the following explicit--naming record definition:

@example
(define-record-type (point make-point point?)
  (fields
    (immutable x point-x)
    (immutable y point-y)))
@end example

With implicit naming, it is still possible to specify some of the names
explicitly; for example, the following overrides the choice of accessor
and mutator names for the widget field.

@example
(define-record-type frob
  (fields (mutable widget getwid setwid!))
  (protocol
    (lambda (p)
      (lambda (n) (p (make-widget n))))))
@end example


@deffn Syntax record-type-descriptor @meta{record name}
Evaluates to the record--type descriptor (see below) associated with the
type specified by @meta{record name}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The @func{record-type-descriptor} procedure works on both
opaque and non--opaque record types.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax record-constructor-descriptor @meta{record name}
Evaluates to the record--constructor descriptor (see below) associated
with @meta{record name}.
@end deffn


The following example uses the @func{record?} procedure from the
@rsixlibrary{records inspection} library:

@example
(define-record-type (point make-point point?)
  (fields (immutable x point-x)
          (mutable y point-y set-point-y!))
  (nongenerative
    point-4893d957-e00b-11d9-817f-00111175eb9e))

(define-record-type (cpoint make-cpoint cpoint?)
  (parent point)
  (protocol
   (lambda (n)
     (lambda (x y c)
       ((n x y) (color->rgb c)))))
  (fields
    (mutable rgb cpoint-rgb cpoint-rgb-set!)))

(define (color->rgb c)
  (cons 'rgb c))

(define p1 (make-point 1 2))
(define p2 (make-cpoint 3 4 'red))

(point? p1)                             @result{} #t
(point? p2)                             @result{} #t
(point? (vector))                       @result{} #f
(point? (cons 'a 'b))                   @result{} #f
(cpoint? p1)                            @result{} #f
(cpoint? p2)                            @result{} #f
(point-x p1)                            @result{} 1
(point-y p1)                            @result{} 2
(point-x p2)                            @result{} 3
(point-y p2)                            @result{} 4
(cpoint-rgb p2)                         @result{} (rgb . red)

(set-point-y! p1 17)                    @result{} unspecified
(point-y p1)                            @result{} 17

(record-rtd p1)
@result{} (record-type-descriptor point)

(define-record-type (ex1 make-ex1 ex1?)
  (protocol (lambda (p) (lambda a (p a))))
  (fields (immutable f ex1-f)))

(define ex1-i1 (make-ex1 1 2 3))
(ex1-f ex1-i1)                          @result{} (1 2 3)

(define-record-type (ex2 make-ex2 ex2?)
  (protocol
    (lambda (p) (lambda (a . b) (p a b))))
  (fields (immutable a ex2-a)
          (immutable b ex2-b)))

(define ex2-i1 (make-ex2 1 2 3))
(ex2-a ex2-i1)                          @result{} 1
(ex2-b ex2-i1)                          @result{} (2 3)

(define-record-type (unit-vector
                     make-unit-vector
                     unit-vector?)
  (protocol
   (lambda (p)
     (lambda (x y z)
       (let ((length
               (sqrt (+ (* x x)
                        (* y y)
                        (* z z)))))
         (p (/ x length)
            (/ y length)
            (/ z length))))))
  (fields (immutable x unit-vector-x)
          (immutable y unit-vector-y)
          (immutable z unit-vector-z)))

(define *ex3-instance* #f)

(define-record-type ex3
  (parent cpoint)
  (protocol
   (lambda (n)
     (lambda (x y t)
       (let ((r ((n x y 'red) t)))
         (set! *ex3-instance* r)
         r))))
  (fields
   (mutable thickness))
  (sealed #t) (opaque #t))

(define ex3-i1 (make-ex3 1 2 17))
(ex3? ex3-i1)                           @result{} #t
(cpoint-rgb ex3-i1) @result{} (rgb . red)
(ex3-thickness ex3-i1)                  @result{} 17
(ex3-thickness-set! ex3-i1 18)          @result{} unspecified
(ex3-thickness ex3-i1)                  @result{} 18
*ex3-instance*                          @result{} ex3-i1

(record? ex3-i1)                        @result{} #f
@end example


@c page
@node stdlib records procedural layer
@subsection Procedural layer


The procedural layer is provided by the @rsixlibrary{records procedural}
library.


@deffn Procedure make-record-type-descriptor @var{name} @var{parent} @var{uid} @var{sealed?} @var{opaque?} @var{fields}
Return a @emph{record-type descriptor}, or @emph{rtd}, representing a
record type distinct from all built--in types and other record types.

The @var{name} argument must be a symbol.  It names the record type, and
is intended purely for informational purposes and may be used for
printing by the underlying Scheme system.

The @var{parent} argument must be either @false{} or an rtd. If it is an
rtd, the returned record type, @var{t}, extends the record type @var{p}
represented by @var{parent}.  An exception with condition type
@code{&assertion} is raised if @var{parent} is sealed (see below).

The @var{uid} argument must be either @false{} or a symbol.  If
@var{uid} is a symbol, the record--creation operation is
@emph{nongenerative} i.e., a new record type is created only if no
previous call to @func{make-record-type-descriptor} was made with the
@var{uid}.  If @var{uid} is @false{}, the record--creation operation is
@emph{generative}, i.e., a new record type is created even if a previous
call to @func{make-record-type-descriptor} was made with the same
arguments.

If @func{make-record-type-descriptor} is called twice with the same
@var{uid} symbol, the parent arguments in the two calls must be
@func{eqv?}, the @var{fields} arguments @func{equal?}, the @var{sealed?}
arguments boolean--equivalent (both @false{} or both true), and the
@var{opaque?} arguments boolean--equivalent.  If these conditions are
not met, an exception with condition type @code{&assertion} is raised
when the second call occurs.  If they are met, the second call returns,
without creating a new record type, the same record--type descriptor (in
the sense of @func{eqv?}) as the first call.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Users are encouraged to use symbol names constructed using
the @acronym{UUID} namespace (for example, using the record--type name
as a prefix) for the uid argument.
@end quotation

The @var{sealed?} flag must be a boolean.  If true, the returned record
type is sealed, i.e., it cannot be extended.

The @var{opaque?} flag must be a boolean.  If true, the record type is
opaque.  If passed an instance of the record type, @func{record?}
returns @false{}.  Moreover, if @code{record-rtd} (see ``Inspection''
below) is called with an instance of the record type, an exception with
condition type @code{&assertion} is raised.  The record type is also
opaque if an opaque parent is supplied.  If @var{opaque?} is @false{}
and an opaque parent is not supplied, the record is not opaque.

The @var{fields} argument must be a vector of field specifiers. Each
field specifier must be a list of the form @code{(mutable @var{name})}
or a list of the form @code{(immutable @var{name})}.  Each name must be
a symbol and names the corresponding field of the record type; the names
need not be distinct.  A field identified as mutable may be modified,
whereas, when a program attempts to obtain a mutator for a field
identified as immutable, an exception with condition type
@code{&assertion} is raised.  Where field order is relevant, e.g., for
record construction and field access, the fields are considered to be
ordered as specified, although no particular order is required for the
actual representation of a record instance.

The specified fields are added to the parent fields, if any, to
determine the complete set of fields of the returned record type.  If
@var{fields} is modified after @func{make-record-type-descriptor} has
been called, the effect on the returned rtd is unspecified.

A generative record--type descriptor created by a call to
@func{make-record-type-descriptor} is not @func{eqv?} to any
record--type descriptor (generative or nongenerative) created by another
call to @func{make-record-type-descriptor}.  A generative record--type
descriptor is @func{eqv?}  only to itself, i.e., @code{(eqv? @vari{rtd}
@varii{rtd})} if, and only if, @code{(eq? @vari{rtd} @varii{rtd})}.
Also, two nongenerative record--type descriptors are @func{eqv?} if, and
only if, they were created by calls to
@func{make-record-type-descriptor} with the same uid arguments.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-type-descriptor? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if the argument is a record--type descriptor, @false{}
otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-record-constructor-descriptor @var{rtd} @var{parent-constructor-descriptor} @var{protocol}
Return a @emph{record-constructor descriptor} (or @emph{constructor
descriptor} for short) that specifies a @emph{record constructor} (or
@emph{constructor} for short), that can be used to construct record
values of the type specified by @var{rtd}, and which can be obtained via
@func{record-constructor}.  A constructor descriptor can also be used to
create other constructor descriptors for subtypes of its own record
type.  @var{rtd} must be a record--type descriptor.  @var{protocol} must
be a procedure or @false{}.  If it is @false{}, a default @var{protocol}
procedure is supplied.

If @var{protocol} is a procedure, it is handled analogously to the
protocol expression in a @func{define-record-type} form.

If @var{rtd} is a base record type @var{parent-constructor-descriptor}
must be @false{}.  In this case, @var{protocol} is called by
@func{record-constructor} with a single argument @var{p}.  @var{p} is a
procedure that expects one argument for every field of @var{rtd} and
returns a record with the fields of @var{rtd} initialized to these
arguments.  The procedure returned by @var{protocol} should call @var{p}
once with the number of arguments @var{p} expects and return the
resulting record as shown in the simple example below:

@example
(lambda (p)
  (lambda (v1 v2 v3)
    (p v1 v2 v3)))
@end example

Here, the call to @code{p} returns a record whose fields are initialized
with the values of @code{v1}, @code{v2}, and @code{v3}.  The expression
above is equivalent to @code{(lambda (p) p)}.  Note that the procedure
returned by @var{protocol} is otherwise unconstrained; specifically, it
can take any number of arguments.

If @var{rtd} is an extension of another record type @var{parent-rtd} and
@var{protocol} is a procedure, @var{parent-constructor-descriptor} must
be a constructor descriptor of @var{parent-rtd} or @false{}.  If
@var{parent-constructor-descriptor} is a constructor descriptor,
@var{protocol} it is called by @code{record-constructor} with a single
argument @var{n}, which is a procedure that accepts the same number of
arguments as the constructor of @var{parent-constructor-descriptor} and
returns a procedure @var{p} that, when called, constructs the record
itself.  The @var{p} procedure expects one argument for every field of
@var{rtd} (not including parent fields) and returns a record with the
fields of @var{rtd} initialized to these arguments, and the fields of
@var{parent-rtd} and its parents initialized as specified by
@var{parent-constructor-descriptor}.

The procedure returned by @var{protocol} should call @var{n} once with
the number of arguments @var{n} expects, call the procedure @var{p} it
returns once with the number of arguments @var{p} expects and return the
resulting record.  A simple @var{protocol} in this case might be written
as follows:

@example
(lambda (n)
  (lambda (v1 v2 v3 x1 x2 x3 x4)
    (let ((p (n v1 v2 v3)))
      (p x1 x2 x3 x4))))
@end example

This passes arguments @var{v1}, @var{v2}, @var{v3} to @var{n} for
@var{parent-constructor-descriptor} and calls @func{p} with @var{x1},
@dots{}, @var{x4} to initialize the fields of @var{rtd} itself.

Thus, the constructor descriptors for a record type form a sequence of
protocols parallel to the sequence of record--type parents.  Each
constructor descriptor in the chain determines the field values for the
associated record type.  Child record constructors need not know the
number or contents of parent fields, only the number of arguments
accepted by the parent constructor.

@var{protocol} may be @false{}, specifying a default constructor that
accepts one argument for each field of @var{rtd} (including the fields
of its parent type, if any).  Specifically, if @var{rtd} is a base type,
the default @var{protocol} procedure behaves as if it were @code{(lambda
(p) p)}.  If @var{rtd} is an extension of another type, then
@var{parent-constructor-descriptor} must be either @false{} or itself
specify a default constructor, and the default @var{protocol} procedure
behaves as if it were:

@example
(lambda (n)
  (lambda (@vari{v} @dots{} @varj{v} @vari{x} @dots{} @vark{x})
    (let ((p (n @vari{v} @dots{} @varj{v})))
      (p @vari{x} @dots{} @vark{x}))))
@end example

The resulting constructor accepts one argument for each of the record
type's complete set of fields (including those of the parent record
type, the parent's parent record type, etc.) and returns a record with
the fields initialized to those arguments, with the field values for the
parent coming before those of the extension in the argument list.  (In
the example, @emph{j} is the complete number of fields of the parent
type, and $k$ is the number of fields of @var{rtd} itself.)

If @var{rtd} is an extension of another record type and
@var{parent-constructor-descriptor} is @false{},
@var{parent-constructor-descriptor} is treated as if it were a
constructor descriptor for the parent rtd of @var{rtd} with a default
protocol.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} If @var{protocol} is a
procedure, the implementation must check the restrictions on it to the
extent performed by applying it as described when the constructor is
called.  An implementation may check whether @var{protocol} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.

@example
(define rtd1
  (make-record-type-descriptor
   'rtd1 #f #f #f #f
   '#((immutable x1) (immutable x2))))

(define rtd2
  (make-record-type-descriptor
   'rtd2 rtd1 #f #f #f
   '#((immutable x3) (immutable x4))))

(define rtd3
  (make-record-type-descriptor
   'rtd3 rtd2 #f #f #f
   '#((immutable x5) (immutable x6))))

(define protocol1
  (lambda (p)
    (lambda (a b c)
      (p (+ a b) (+ b c)))))

(define protocol2
  (lambda (n)
    (lambda (a b c d e f)
      (let ((p (n a b c)))
        (p (+ d e) (+ e f))))))

(define protocol3
  (lambda (n)
    (lambda (a b c d e f g h i)
      (let ((p (n a b c d e f)))
        (p (+ g h) (+ h i))))))

(define cd1
  (make-record-constructor-descriptor
    rtd1 #f protocol1))

(define cd2
  (make-record-constructor-descriptor
    rtd2 cd1 protocol2))

(define cd3
  (make-record-constructor-descriptor
    rtd3 cd2 protocol3))

(define make-rtd1 (record-constructor cd1))

(define make-rtd2 (record-constructor cd2))

(define make-rtd3 (record-constructor cd3))

(make-rtd3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9)
=> <record with fields initialized to 3, 5, 9, 11, 15, 17>
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-constructor @var{constructor-descriptor}
Call the @var{protocol} of @var{constructor-descriptor} (as described
for @func{make-record-constructor-descriptor}) and returns the resulting
constructor @var{constructor} for records of the record type associated
with @var{constructor-descriptor}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-predicate @var{rtd}
Return a procedure that, given an object @var{obj}, returns @true{} if
@var{obj} is a record of the type represented by @var{rtd}, and @false{}
otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-accessor @var{rtd} @var{k}
@var{k} must be a valid field index of @var{rtd}.  The
@func{record-accessor} procedure returns a one--argument procedure whose
argument must be a record of the type represented by @var{rtd}.  This
procedure returns the value of the selected field of that record.

The field selected corresponds to the @var{k}th element (0--based) of
the @var{fields} argument to the invocation of
@func{make-record-type-descriptor} that created @var{rtd}.  Note that
@var{k} cannot be used to specify a field of any type @var{rtd} extends.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-mutator @var{rtd} @var{k}
@var{k} must be a valid field index of @var{rtd}.  The
@func{record-mutator} procedure returns a two--argument procedure whose
arguments must be a record record @var{r} of the type represented by
@var{rtd} and an object @var{obj}.  This procedure stores @var{obj}
within the field of @var{r} specified by @var{k}.  The @var{k} argument
is as in @func{record-accessor}.  If @var{k} specifies an immutable
field, an exception with condition type @code{&assertion} is raised.
The mutator returns unspecified values.
@end deffn


@example
(define :point
  (make-record-type-descriptor
    'point #f
    #f #f #f
    '#((mutable x) (mutable y))))

(define :point-cd
  (make-record-constructor-descriptor :point #f #f))

(define make-point (record-constructor :point-cd))

(define point? (record-predicate :point))
(define point-x (record-accessor :point 0))
(define point-y (record-accessor :point 1))
(define point-x-set! (record-mutator :point 0))
(define point-y-set! (record-mutator :point 1))

(define p1 (make-point 1 2))
(point? p1)                             @result{} #t
(point-x p1)                            @result{} 1
(point-y p1)                            @result{} 2
(point-x-set! p1 5)                     @result{} unspecified
(point-x p1)                            @result{} 5

(define :point2
  (make-record-type-descriptor
    'point2 :point
    #f #f # f '#((mutable x) (mutable y))))

(define make-point2
  (record-constructor
    (make-record-constructor-descriptor :point2
      #f #f)))
(define point2? (record-predicate :point2))
(define point2-xx (record-accessor :point2 0))
(define point2-yy (record-accessor :point2 1))

(define p2 (make-point2 1 2 3 4))
(point? p2)                             @result{} #t
(point-x p2)                            @result{} 1
(point-y p2)                            @result{} 2
(point2-xx p2)                          @result{} 3
(point2-yy p2)                          @result{} 4

(define :point-cd/abs
  (make-record-constructor-descriptor
   :point #f
   (lambda (new)
     (lambda (x y)
       (new (abs x) (abs y))))))

(define make-point/abs
  (record-constructor :point-cd/abs))

(point-x (make-point/abs -1 -2))        @result{} 1
(point-y (make-point/abs -1 -2))        @result{} 2

(define :cpoint
  (make-record-type-descriptor
   'cpoint :point
   #f #f #f
   '#((mutable rgb))))

(define make-cpoint
  (record-constructor
   (make-record-constructor-descriptor
    :cpoint :point-cd
    (lambda (p)
      (lambda (x y c)
	((p x y) (color->rgb c)))))))

(define make-cpoint/abs
  (record-constructor
   (make-record-constructor-descriptor
    :cpoint :point-cd/abs
    (lambda (p)
      (lambda (x y c)
	((p x y) (color->rgb c)))))))

(define cpoint-rgb
  (record-accessor :cpoint 0))

(define (color->rgb c)
  (cons 'rgb c))

(cpoint-rgb (make-cpoint -1 -3 'red))   @result{} (rgb . red)
(point-x (make-cpoint -1 -3 'red))      @result{} -1
(point-x (make-cpoint/abs -1 -3 'red))  @result{} 1
@end example


@c page
@node stdlib records inspection
@subsection Inspection


The @rsixlibrary{records inspection} library provides procedures for
inspecting records and their record--type descriptors.  These procedures
are designed to allow the writing of portable printers and inspectors.

On the one hand, @func{record?} and @func{record-rtd} treat records of
opaque record types as if they were not records.  On the other hand, the
inspection procedures that operate on record--type descriptors
themselves are not affected by opacity.  In other words, opacity
controls whether a program can obtain an rtd from a record.  If the
program has access to the original rtd via
@func{make-record-type-descriptor} or @func{record-type-descriptor}, it
can still make use of the inspection procedures.


@deffn Procedure record? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a record, and its record type is not
opaque, and return @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-rtd @var{record}
Return the rtd representing the type of @var{record} if the type is not
opaque.  The rtd of the most precise type is returned; that is, the type
@var{t} such that @var{record} is of type @var{t} but not of any type
that extends @var{t}.  If the type is opaque, an exception is raised
with condition type @code{&assertion}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-type-name @var{rtd}
Return the name of the record--type descriptor @var{rtd}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-type-parent @var{rtd}
Return the parent of the record--type descriptor @var{rtd}, or @false{}
if it has none.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-type-uid @var{rtd}
Return the uid of the record--type descriptor rtd, or @false{} if it has
none.  (An implementation may assign a generated uid to a record type
even if the type is generative, so the return of a uid does not
necessarily imply that the type is nongenerative.)
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-type-generative? @var{rtd}
Return @true{} if @var{rtd} is generative, and @false{} if not.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-type-sealed? @var{rtd}
Return @true{} if the record-type descriptor is sealed, and @false{} if
not.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-type-opaque? @var{rtd}
Return @true{} if the the record-type descriptor is opaque, and @false{}
if not.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-type-field-names @var{rtd}
Return a vector of symbols naming the fields of the type represented by
@var{rtd} (not including the fields of parent types) where the fields
are ordered as described under @func{make-record-type-descriptor}.  The
returned vector may be immutable.  If the returned vector is modified,
the effect on @var{rtd} is unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure record-field-mutable? @var{rtd} @var{k}
Returns @true{} if the field specified by @var{k} of the type
represented by @var{rtd} is mutable, and @false{} if not.  @var{k} is as
in @func{record-accessor}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib exceptions
@section Exceptions and conditions


Scheme allows programs to deal with exceptional situations using two
cooperating facilities: The exception system for raising and handling
exceptional situations, and the condition system for describing these
situations.

The exception system allows the program, when it detects an exceptional
situation, to pass control to an exception handler, and to dynamically
establish such exception handlers.  Exception handlers are always
invoked with an object describing the exceptional situation.  Scheme's
condition system provides a standardized taxonomy of such descriptive
objects, as well as a facility for extending the taxonomy.


@menu
* stdlib exceptions exceptions::        Exceptions.
* stdlib exceptions conditions::        Conditions.
@end menu



@c page
@node stdlib exceptions exceptions
@subsection Exceptions


@cindex Catching exceptions


This section describes Scheme's exception--handling and
exception--raising constructs provided by the @rsixlibrary{exceptions}
library.

Exception handlers are one--argument procedures that determine the
action the program takes when an exceptional situation is signalled.
The system implicitly maintains a current exception handler.

The program raises an exception by invoking the current exception
handler, passing it an object encapsulating information about the
exception.  Any procedure accepting one argument may serve as an
exception handler and any object may be used to represent an exception.

The system maintains the current exception handler as part of the
dynamic environment of the program (@pxref{lang basic dynamic extent}).

When a program begins its execution, the current exception handler is
expected to handle all @code{&serious} conditions by interrupting
execution, reporting that an exception has been raised, and displaying
information about the condition object that was provided.  The handler
may then exit, or may provide a choice of other options.  Moreover, the
exception handler is expected to return when passed any other
non--@code{&serious} condition.  Interpretation of these expectations
necessarily depends upon the nature of the system in which programs are
executed, but the intent is that users perceive the raising of an
exception as a controlled escape from the situation that raised the
exception, not as a crash.


@deffn Procedure with-exception-handler @var{handler} @var{thunk}
@var{handler} must be a procedure and should accept one argument.
@var{thunk} must be a procedure that accepts zero arguments.  The
@func{with-exception-handler} procedure returns the results of invoking
@var{thunk}.  @var{handler} is installed as the current exception
handler for the dynamic extent (as determined by @func{dynamic-wind}) of
the invocation of @var{thunk}.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{handler} to the extent performed by applying it
as described when it is called as a result of a call to @func{raise} or
@func{raise-continuable}.  An implementation may check whether
@var{handler} is an appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax guard (@meta{variable} @hyperi{cond clause} @hyperii{cond clause} @dots{}) @meta{body}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} {=>}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} else
Each @meta{cond clause} is as in the specification of @func{cond}.  (See
report section @ref{baselib expressions derived cond}.)  @code{=>} and
@code{else} are the same as in the @rsixlibrary{base} library.

Evaluating a @func{guard} form evaluates @meta{body} with an exception
handler that binds the raised object to @meta{variable} and within the
scope of that binding evaluates the clauses as if they were the clauses
of a @func{cond} expression.  That implicit @func{cond} expression is
evaluated with the continuation and dynamic environment of the
@func{guard} form.  If every @meta{cond clause}'s @hyper{test} evaluates
to @false{} and there is no @code{else} clause, then
@func{raise-continuable} is re--invoked on the raised object within the
dynamic environment of the original call to @func{raise} except that the
current exception handler is that of the @func{guard} expression.

The final expression in a @meta{cond} clause is in a tail context if the
@func{guard} expression itself is.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure raise @var{obj}
Raise a non--continuable exception by invoking the current exception
handler on @var{obj}.  The handler is called with a continuation whose
dynamic environment is that of the call to @func{raise}, except that the
current exception handler is the one that was in place when the handler
being called was installed.  When the handler returns, a
non--continuable exception with condition type @code{&non-continuable}
is raised in the same dynamic environment as the handler.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure raise-continuable @var{obj}
Raise a @emph{continuable exception} by invoking the current exception
handler on @var{obj}. The handler is called with a continuation that is
equivalent to the continuation of the call to @func{raise-continuable},
with these two exceptions:

@enumerate
@item
The current exception handler is the one that was in place when the
handler being called was installed.

@item
If the handler being called returns, then it will again become the
current exception handler.
@end enumerate

If the handler returns, the values it returns become the values returned
by the call to @func{raise-continuable}.
@end deffn

@example
(guard (con
         ((error? con)
          (if (message-condition? con)
              (display (condition-message con))
              (display "an error has occurred"))
          'error)
         ((violation? con)
          (if (message-condition? con)
              (display (condition-message con))
              (display "the program has a bug"))
          'violation))
  (raise
    (condition
      (make-error)
      (make-message-condition "I am an error"))))
   ;; prints: I am an error
@result{} error

(guard (con
         ((error? con)
          (if (message-condition? con)
              (display (condition-message con))
              (display "an error has occurred"))
          'error))
  (raise
    (condition
      (make-violation)
      (make-message-condition "I am an error"))))
@result{} exception &violation

(guard (con
         ((error? con)
          (display "error opening file")
          #f))
  (call-with-input-file "foo.scm" read))
   ;; prints: error opening file
@result{} #f

(with-exception-handler
  (lambda (con)
    (cond
      ((not (warning? con))
       (raise con))
      ((message-condition? con)
       (display (condition-message con)))
      (else
       (display "a warning has been issued")))
    42)
  (lambda ()
    (+ (raise-continuable
         (condition
           (make-warning)
           (make-message-condition
             "should be a number")))
       23)))
   ;; prints: should be a number
@result{} 65
@end example


@c page
@node stdlib exceptions conditions
@subsection Conditions


This section describes Scheme's @rsixlibrary{conditions} library for
creating and inspecting condition types and values.  A condition value
encapsulates information about an exceptional situation.  Scheme also
defines a number of basic condition types.

Scheme conditions provides two mechanisms to enable communication about
an exceptional situation: subtyping among condition types allows
handling code to determine the general nature of an exception even
though it does not anticipate its exact nature, and compound conditions
allow an exceptional situation to be described in multiple ways.


@menu
* stdlib exceptions conditions objects::        Condition objects.
* stdlib exceptions conditions types::          Standard condition types.
@end menu


@c page
@node stdlib exceptions conditions objects
@subsubsection Condition objects


Conceptually, there are two different kinds of condition objects:
@emph{simple conditions} and @emph{compound conditions}.  An object that
is either a simple condition or a compound condition is simply a
@emph{condition}.  Compound conditions form a type disjoint from the
base types described in report section @ref{baselib types}.  A simple
condition describes a single aspect of an exceptional situation.  A
compound condition represents multiple aspects of an exceptional
situation as a list of simple conditions, its @emph{components}.  Most
of the operations described in this section treat a simple condition
identically to a compound condition with itself as its own sole
component.  For a subtype @var{t} of @code{&condition}, a
@emph{condition of type @var{t}} is either a record of type @var{t} or a
compound condition containing a component of type @var{t}.


@tindex &condition
@deffn {Condition Type} {&condition}
Simple conditions are records of subtypes of the @code{&condition}
record type.  The @code{&condition} type has no fields and is neither
sealed nor opaque.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure condition @vari{condition} @dots{}
The @func{condition} procedure returns a condition object with the
components of the @var{condition}s as its components, in the same order,
i.e., with the components of @vari{condition} appearing first in the
same order as in @vari{condition}, then with the components of
@varii{condition}, and so on.  The returned condition is compound if the
total number of components is zero or greater than one.  Otherwise, it
may be compound or simple.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure simple-conditions @var{condition}
The @func{simple-conditions} procedure returns a list of the components
of @var{condition}, in the same order as they appeared in the
construction of @var{condition}.  The returned list is immutable.  If
the returned list is modified, the effect on @var{condition} is
unspecified.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Because @func{condition} decomposes its arguments into
simple conditions, @func{simple-conditions} always returns a
``flattened'' list of simple conditions.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {condition?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a (simple or compound) condition,
otherwise returns @false{}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure condition-predicate @var{rtd}
@var{rtd} must be a record--type descriptor of a subtype of
@code{&condition}.  The @func{condition-predicate} procedure returns a
procedure that takes one argument.  This procedure returns @true{} if
its argument is a condition of the condition type represented by
@var{rtd}, i.e., if it is either a simple condition of that record type
(or one of its subtypes) or a compound conditition with such a simple
condition as one of its components, and @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure condition-accessor @var{rtd} @var{proc}
@var{rtd} must be a record--type descriptor of a subtype of
@code{&condition}.  @var{proc} should accept one argument, a record of
the record type of @var{rtd}.  The @func{condition-accessor} procedure
returns a procedure that accepts a single argument, which must be a
condition of the type represented by @var{rtd}.  This procedure extracts
the first component of the condition of the type represented by
@var{rtd}, and returns the result of applying @var{proc} to that
component.
@end deffn

@example
(define-record-type (&cond1 make-cond1 real-cond1?)
  (parent &condition)
  (fields
   (immutable x real-cond1-x)))

(define cond1?
  (condition-predicate
    (record-type-descriptor &cond1)))
(define cond1-x
  (condition-accessor
    (record-type-descriptor &cond1)
    real-cond1-x))

(define foo (make-cond1 'foo))

(condition? foo)                        @result{} #t
(cond1? foo)                            @result{} #t
(cond1-x foo)                           @result{} foo

(define-record-type (&cond2 make-cond2 real-cond2?)
  (parent &condition)
  (fields
   (immutable y real-cond2-y)))

(define cond2?
  (condition-predicate
    (record-type-descriptor &cond2)))
(define cond2-y
  (condition-accessor
     (record-type-descriptor &cond2)
     real-cond2-y))

(define bar (make-cond2 'bar))

(condition? (condition foo bar))        @result{} #t
(cond1? (condition foo bar))            @result{} #t
(cond2? (condition foo bar))            @result{} #t
(cond1? (condition foo))                @result{} #t
(real-cond1? (condition foo))           @result{} unspecified
(real-cond1? (condition foo bar))       @result{} #f
(cond1-x (condition foo bar))           @result{} foo
(cond2-y (condition foo bar))           @result{} bar

(equal? (simple-conditions (condition foo bar))
        (list foo bar))                 @result{} #t

(equal? (simple-conditions
          (condition foo (condition bar)))
        (list foo bar))                 @result{} #t
@end example


@deffn Syntax define-condition-type @meta{condition-type} @meta{supertype} @meta{constructor} @hyper{predicate} @hyperi{field-spec} @dots{}
@meta{condition-type}, @hyper{supertypes}, @meta{constructor}, and
@hyper{predicate} must all be identifiers.  Each @meta{field-spec} must
be of the form

@example
(@meta{field} @hyper{accessor})
@end example

@noindent
where both @meta{field} and @hyper{accessor} must be identifiers.

The @func{define-condition-type} form expands into a record--type
definition for a record type @meta{condition-type}.  The record type
will be non--opaque, non--sealed, and its fields will be immutable.  It
will have @meta{supertype} has its parent type.  The remaining
identifiers will be bound as follows:

@itemize
@item
@meta{constructor} is bound to a default constructor for the type: It
accepts one argument for each of the record type's complete set of
fields (including parent types, with the fields of the parent coming
before those of the extension in the arguments) and returns a condition
object initialized to those arguments.

@item
@meta{predicate} is bound to a predicate that identifies conditions of
type @meta{condition-type} or any of its subtypes.

@item
Each @meta{accessor} is bound to a procedure that extracts the
corresponding field from a condition of type @meta{condition-type}.
@end itemize
@end deffn

@example
(define-condition-type &c &condition
  make-c c?
  (x c-x))

(define-condition-type &c1 &c
  make-c1 c1?
  (a c1-a))

(define-condition-type &c2 &c
  make-c2 c2?
  (b c2-b))
@end example

@example
(define v1 (make-c1 "V1" "a1"))

(c? v1)        @result{} #t
(c1? v1)       @result{} #t
(c2? v1)       @result{} #f
(c-x v1)       @result{} "V1"
(c1-a v1)      @result{} "a1"
@end example

@example
(define v2 (make-c2 "V2" "b2"))

(c? v2)        @result{} #t
(c1? v2)       @result{} #f
(c2? v2)       @result{} #t
(c-x v2)       @result{} "V2"
(c2-b v2)      @result{} "b2"
@end example

@example
(define v3 (condition
             (make-c1 "V3/1" "a3")
             (make-c2 "V3/2" "b3")))

(c? v3)        @result{} #t
(c1? v3)       @result{} #t
(c2? v3)       @result{} #t
(c-x v3)       @result{} "V3/1"
(c1-a v3)      @result{} "a3"
(c2-b v3)      @result{} "b3"
@end example

@example
(define v4 (condition v1 v2))

(c? v4)        @result{} #t
(c1? v4)       @result{} #t
(c2? v4)       @result{} #t
(c-x v4)       @result{} "V1"
(c1-a v4)      @result{} "a1"
(c2-b v4)      @result{} "b2"
@end example

@example
(define v5 (condition v2 v3))

(c? v5)        @result{} #t
(c1? v5)       @result{} #t
(c2? v5)       @result{} #t
(c-x v5)       @result{} "V2"
(c1-a v5)      @result{} "a3"
(c2-b v5)      @result{} "b2"
@end example


@c page
@node stdlib exceptions conditions types
@subsubsection Standard condition types


Hierarchy of standard condition types:

@example
&condition
   |
   +-----> &warning
   |
   +-----> &message
   |       &irritants
   |       &who
   |
   +-----> &serious
              |
              +-----> &error
              |
              +-----> &violation
                         |
                         +-----> &assertion
                         |
                         +-----> &non-continuable
                         |
                         +-----> &implementation-restriction
                         |
                         +-----> &lexical
                         |
                         +-----> &syntax
                         |
                          -----> &undefined
@end example


@tindex &message
@deffn {Condition Type} {&message}
@deffnx Procedure make-message-condition @var{message}
@deffnx Procedure message-condition? @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure condition-message @var{condition}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &message &condition
  make-message-condition message-condition?
  (message condition-message))
@end example

It carries a message further describing the nature of the condition to
humans.
@end deffn


@tindex &warning
@deffn {Condition Type} {&warning}
@deffnx Procedure make-warning
@deffnx Procedure warning? @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &warning &condition
  make-warning warning?)
@end example

This type describes conditions that do not, in principle, prohibit
immediate continued execution of the program, but may interfere with the
program's execution later.
@end deffn


@tindex &serious
@deffn {Condition Type} {&serious}
@deffnx Procedure make-serious-condition
@deffnx Procedure serious-condition? @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &serious &condition
  make-serious-condition serious-condition?)
@end example

This type describes conditions serious enough that they cannot safely be
ignored.  This condition type is primarily intended as a supertype of
other condition types.
@end deffn


@tindex &error
@deffn {Condition Type} {&error}
@deffnx Procedure make-error
@deffnx Procedure error? @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &error &serious
  make-error error?)
@end example

This type describes errors, typically caused by something that has gone
wrong in the interaction of the program with the external world or the
user.
@end deffn


@tindex &violation
@deffn {Condition Type} {&violation}
@deffnx Procedure make-violation
@deffnx Procedure violation? @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &violation &serious
  make-violation violation?)
@end example

This type describes violations of the language standard or a library
standard, typically caused by a programming error.
@end deffn


@tindex &assertion
@deffn {Condition Type} {&assertion}
@deffnx Procedure make-assertion-violation
@deffnx Procedure assertion-violation? @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &assertion &violation
  make-assertion-violation assertion-violation?)
@end example

This type describes an invalid call to a procedure, either passing an
invalid number of arguments, or passing an argument of the wrong type.
@end deffn


@tindex &irritants
@deffn {Condition Type} {&irritants}
@deffnx Procedure make-irritants-condition @var{irritants}
@deffnx Procedure irritants-condition? @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure condition-irritants @var{condition}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &irritants &condition
  make-irritants-condition irritants-condition?
  (irritants condition-irritants))
@end example

@var{irritants} should be a list of objects.  This condition provides
additional information about a condition, typically the argument list of
a procedure that detected an exception.  Conditions of this type are
created by the @func{error} and @func{assertion-violation} procedures of
report section @ref{baselib errors}.
@end deffn


@tindex &who
@deffn {Condition Type} {&who}
@deffnx Procedure make-who-condition @var{who}
@deffnx Procedure who-condition? @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure condition-who @var{condition}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &who &condition
  make-who-condition who-condition?
  (who condition-who))
@end example

@var{who} should be a symbol or string identifying the entity reporting
the exception.  Conditions of this type are created by the @func{error}
and @func{assertion-violation} procedures (report section @ref{baselib
errors}), and the @func{syntax-violation} procedure (section @ref{lang
basic syntax violations}).
@end deffn


@tindex &non-continuable
@deffn {Condition Type} {&non-continuable}
@deffnx Procedure make-non-continuable-violation
@deffnx Procedure non-continuable-violation? @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &non-continuable &violation
  make-non-continuable-violation
  non-continuable-violation?)
@end example

This type indicates that an exception handler invoked via @func{raise}
has returned.
@end deffn


@tindex &implementation-restriction
@deffn {Condition Type} {&implementation-restriction}
@deffnx Procedure make-implementation-restriction-violation
@deffnx Procedure implementation-restriction-violation? @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &implementation-restriction
    &violation
  make-implementation-restriction-violation
  implementation-restriction-violation?)
@end example

This type describes a violation of an implementation restriction allowed
by the specification, such as the absence of representations for NaNs
and infinities.
@end deffn


@tindex &lexical
@deffn {Condition Type} {&lexical}
@deffnx Procedure make-lexical-violation
@deffnx Procedure lexical-violation? @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &lexical &violation
  make-lexical-violation lexical-violation?)
@end example

This type describes syntax violations at the level of the datum syntax.
@end deffn


@tindex &syntax
@deffn {Condition Type} {&syntax}
@deffnx Procedure make-syntax-violation @var{form} @var{subform}
@deffnx Procedure syntax-violation? @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure syntax-violation-form @var{condition}
@deffnx Procedure syntax-violation-subform @var{condition}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &syntax &violation
  make-syntax-violation syntax-violation?
  (form syntax-violation-form)
  (subform syntax-violation-subform))
@end example

This type describes syntax violations.  @var{form} should be the
erroneous syntax object or a datum representing the code of the
erroneous form.  @var{subform} should be an optional syntax object or
datum within the erroneous form that more precisely locates the
violation.  It can be @false{} to indicate the absence of more precise
information.
@end deffn


@tindex &undefined
@deffn {Condition Type} {&undefined}
@deffnx Procedure make-undefined-violation
@deffnx Procedure undefined-violation? @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &undefined &violation
  make-undefined-violation undefined-violation?)
@end example

This type describes unbound identifiers in the program.
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib io
@section Input/output


This chapter describes Scheme's libraries for performing input and
output:

@table @rsixlibrary
@item io ports
it is an I/O layer for conventional, imperative buffered input and
output with text and binary data;

@item io simple
it is a convenience library atop the @rsixlibrary{io ports} library for
textual I/O, compatible with the traditional Scheme I/O procedures.
@end table

The section on conditions defines a condition--type hierarchy that is
exported by both the @rsixlibrary{io ports} and @rsixlibrary{io simple}
libraries.


@menu
* stdlib io conditions::        Condition types.
* stdlib io port::              Port input/output.
* stdlib io simple::            Simple input/output.
@end menu


@c page
@node stdlib io conditions
@subsection Condition types


The procedures described in this chapter, when they detect an
exceptional situation that arises from an ``I/O errors'', raise an
exception with condition type @code{&i/o}.

The condition types and corresponding predicates and accessors are
exported by both the @rsixlibrary{io ports} and @rsixlibrary{io simple}
libraries.  They are also exported by the @rsixlibrary{files} library.


@tindex &i/o
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-error}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-error?} @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o &error
  make-i/o-error i/o-error?)
@end example

This is a supertype for a set of more specific I/O errors.
@end deffn


@tindex &i/o-read
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o-read}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-read-error}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-read-error?} @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-read &i/o
  make-i/o-read-error i/o-read-error?)
@end example

This condition type describes read errors that occurred during an I/O
operation.
@end deffn


@tindex &i/o-write
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o-write}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-write-error}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-write-error?} @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-write &i/o
  make-i/o-write-error i/o-write-error?)
@end example

This condition type describes write errors that occurred during an I/O
operation.
@end deffn


@tindex &i/o-invalid-position
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o-invalid-position}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-invalid-position-error} @var{position}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-invalid-position-error?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-error-position} @var{condition}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-invalid-position &i/o
  make-i/o-invalid-position-error
  i/o-invalid-position-error?
  (position i/o-error-position))
@end example

This condition type describes attempts to set the file position to an
invalid position.  @var{position} should be the file position that the
program intended to set.  This condition describes a range error, but
not an assertion violation.
@end deffn


@tindex &i/o-filename
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o-filename}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-filename-error} @var{filename}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-filename-error?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-error-filename} @var{condition}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-filename &i/o
  make-i/o-filename-error i/o-filename-error?
  (filename i/o-error-filename))
@end example

This condition type describes an I/O error that occurred during an
operation on a named file.  @var{filename} should be the name of the
file.
@end deffn


@tindex &i/o-file-protection
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o-file-protection}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-file-protection-error} @var{filename}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-file-protection-error?} @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-file-protection
    &i/o-filename
  make-i/o-file-protection-error
  i/o-file-protection-error?)
@end example

A condition of this type specifies that an operation tried to operate on
a named file with insufficient access rights.
@end deffn


@tindex &i/o-file-is-read-only
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o-file-is-read-only}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-file-is-read-only-error} @var{filename}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-file-is-read-only-error?} @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-file-is-read-only
    &i/o-file-protection
  make-i/o-file-is-read-only-error
  i/o-file-is-read-only-error?)
@end example

A condition of this type specifies that an operation tried to operate on
a named read--only file under the assumption that it is writeable.
@end deffn


@tindex &i/o-file-already-exists
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o-file-already-exists}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-file-already-exists-error} @var{filename}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-file-already-exists-error?} @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-file-already-exists
    &i/o-filename
  make-i/o-file-already-exists-error
  i/o-file-already-exists-error?)
@end example

A condition of this type specifies that an operation tried to operate on
an existing named file under the assumption that it did not exist.
@end deffn


@tindex &i/o-file-does-not-exist
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o-file-does-not-exist}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-file-does-not-exist-error} @var{filename}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-file-does-not-exist-error?} @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-file-does-not-exist
    &i/o-filename
  make-i/o-file-does-not-exist-error
  i/o-file-does-not-exist-error?)
@end example

A condition of this type specifies that an operation tried to operate on
an non--existent named file under the assumption that it existed.
@end deffn


@tindex &i/o-port
@deffn {Condition Type} {&i/o-port}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-port-error} @var{port}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-port-error?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-error-port} @var{condition}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-port &i/o
  make-i/o-port-error i/o-port-error?
  (port i/o-error-port))
@end example

This condition type specifies the port with which an I/O error is
associated.  @var{port} should be the port.  Conditions raised by
procedures accepting a port as an argument should include an
@code{&i/o-port-error} condition.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port
@subsection Port input/output


The @rsixlibrary{io ports} library defines an I/O layer for
conventional, imperative buffered input and output.  A @emph{port}
represents a buffered access object for a data sink or source or both
simultaneously.  The library allows ports to be created from arbitrary
data sources and sinks.

The @rsixlibrary{io ports} library distinguishes between @emph{input
ports} and @emph{output ports}.  An input port is a source for data,
whereas an output port is a sink for data.  A port may be both an input
port and an output port; such a port typically provides simultaneous
read and write access to a file or other data.

The @rsixlibrary{io ports} library also distinguishes between
@emph{binary ports}, which are sources or sinks for uninterpreted bytes,
and @emph{textual ports}, which are sources or sinks for characters and
strings.

This section uses @var{input-port}, @var{output-port},
@var{binary-port}, @var{textual-port}, @var{binary-input-port},
@var{textual-input-port}, @var{binary-output-port},
@var{textual-output-port}, and @var{port} as names for arguments that
must be input ports (or combined input/output ports), output ports (or
combined input/output ports), binary ports, textual ports, binary input
ports, textual input ports, binary output ports, textual output ports,
or any kind of port, respectively.


@menu
* stdlib io port file names::           File names.
* stdlib io port file options::         File options.
* stdlib io port buffer modes::         Buffer modes.
* stdlib io port transcoders::          Transcoders.
* stdlib io port eof object::           End of file object.
* stdlib io port io ports::             Input and output ports.
* stdlib io port input ports::          Input ports.
* stdlib io port binary input::         Binary input.
* stdlib io port textual input::        Textual input.
* stdlib io port output ports::         Output ports.
* stdlib io port binary output::        Binary output.
* stdlib io port textual output::       Textual output.
* stdlib io port input output ports::   Input/output ports.
@end menu

@c page
@node stdlib io port file names
@subsubsection File names


Some of the procedures described in this chapter accept a file name as
an argument.  Valid values for such a file name include strings that
name a file using the native notation of filesystem paths on an
implementation's underlying operating system, and may include
implementation--dependent values as well.

A @var{filename} parameter name means that the corresponding argument
must be a file name.


@c page
@node stdlib io port file options
@subsubsection File options


When opening a file, the various procedures in this library accept a
@code{file-options} object that encapsulates flags to specify how the
file is to be opened.  A @code{file-options} object is an enum--set over
the symbols constituting valid file options.  A @var{file-options}
parameter name means that the corresponding argument must be a
file--options object.


@deffn Syntax file-options @meta{file-options symbol} @dots{}
Each @meta{file-options symbol} must be a symbol.  The
@code{file-options} syntax returns a file--options object that
encapsulates the specified options.

When supplied to an operation that opens a file for output, the
file--options object returned by @code{(file-options)} (without
arguments) specifies that the file is created if it does not exist and
an exception with condition type @code{&i/o-file-already-exists} is
raised if it does exist.  The following standard options can be included
to modify the default behavior.

@table @code
@item no-create
If the file does not already exist, it is not created; instead, an
exception with condition type @code{&i/o-file-does-not-exist} is raised.
If the file already exists, the exception with condition type
@code{&i/o-file-already-exists} is not raised and the file is truncated
to zero length.

@item no-fail
If the file already exists, the exception with condition type
@code{&i/o-file-already-exists} is not raised, even if @code{no-create}
is not included, and the file is truncated to zero length.

@item no-truncate
If the file already exists and the exception with condition type
@code{&i/o-file-already-exists} has been inhibited by inclusion of
@code{no-create} or @code{no-fail}, the file is not truncated, but the
port's current position is still set to the beginning of the file.
@end table

These options have no effect when a file is opened only for input.
Symbols other than those listed above may be used as @meta{file-options
symbol}s; they have implementation--specific meaning, if any.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Only the name of @meta{file-options symbol} is significant.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port buffer modes
@subsubsection Buffer modes


Each port has an associated buffer mode.  For an output port, the buffer
mode defines when an output operation flushes the buffer associated with
the output port.  For an input port, the buffer mode defines how much
data will be read to satisfy read operations.  The possible buffer modes
are the symbols:

@table @code
@item none
for no buffering,

@item line
for flushing upon line endings and reading up to line endings, or other
implementation--dependent behavior,

@item block
for arbitrary buffering.
@end table

This section uses the parameter name @var{buffer-mode} for arguments
that must be buffer-mode symbols.

If two ports are connected to the same mutable source, both ports are
unbuffered, and reading a byte or character from that shared source via
one of the two ports would change the bytes or characters seen via the
other port, a lookahead operation on one port will render the peeked
byte or character inaccessible via the other port, while a subsequent
read operation on the peeked port will see the peeked byte or character
even though the port is otherwise unbuffered.

In other words, the semantics of buffering is defined in terms of side
effects on shared mutable sources, and a lookahead operation has the
same side effect on the shared source as a read operation.


@deffn Syntax buffer-mode @meta{buffer-mode symbol}
@meta{buffer-mode symbol} must be a symbol whose name is one of
@code{none}, @code{line}, and @code{block}.  The result is the
corresponding symbol, and specifies the associated buffer mode.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Only the name of @meta{buffer-mode symbol} is significant.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {buffer-mode?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if the argument is a valid buffer--mode symbol, and
returns @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib io port transcoders
@subsubsection Transcoders


Several different Unicode encoding schemes describe standard ways to
encode characters and strings as byte sequences and to decode those
sequences.  Within this document, a @emph{codec} is an immutable Scheme
object that represents a Unicode or similar encoding scheme.

An @emph{end--of--line style} is a symbol that, if it is not
@code{none}, describes how a textual port transcodes representations of
line endings.

A @emph{transcoder} is an immutable Scheme object that combines a codec
with an end--of--line style and a method for handling decoding errors.
Each transcoder represents some specific bidirectional (but not
necessarily lossless), possibly stateful translation between byte
sequences and Unicode characters and strings.  Every transcoder can
operate in the input direction (bytes to characters) or in the output
direction (characters to bytes).  A @var{transcoder} parameter name
means that the corresponding argument must be a transcoder.

A @emph{binary port} is a port that supports binary I/O, does not have
an associated transcoder and does not support textual I/O.  A
@emph{textual port} is a port that supports textual I/O, and does not
support binary I/O.  A textual port may or may not have an associated
transcoder.


@deffn Procedure latin-1-codec
@deffnx Procedure utf-8-codec
@deffnx Procedure utf-16-codec
These are predefined codecs for the @iso{} 8859-1, @utf{}-8, and
@utf{}-16 encoding schemes.

A call to any of these procedures returns a value that is equal in the
sense of @func{eqv?} to the result of any other call to the same
procedure.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax eol-style @meta{eol-style symbol}
@meta{eol-style symbol} should be a symbol whose name is one of
@code{lf}, @code{cr}, @code{crlf}, @code{nel}, @code{crnel}, @code{ls},
and @code{none}.

The form evaluates to the corresponding symbol.  If the name of
@meta{eol-style symbol} is not one of these symbols, the effect and
result are implementation--dependent; in particular, the result may be
an eol--style symbol acceptable as an @var{eol-style} argument to
@code{make-transcoder}.  Otherwise, an exception is raised.

All eol--style symbols except @code{none} describe a specific
line--ending encoding:

@example
lf              @meta{linefeed}
cr              @meta{carriage return}
crlf            @meta{carriage return} @meta{linefeed}
nel             @meta{next line}
crnel           @meta{carriage return} @meta{next line}
ls              @meta{line separator}
@end example

For a textual port with a transcoder, and whose transcoder has an
eol--style symbol @code{none}, no conversion occurs.  For a textual
input port, any eol--style symbol other than @code{none} means that all
of the above line-ending encodings are recognized and are translated
into a single linefeed.  For a textual output port, @code{none} and
@code{lf} are equivalent.  Linefeed characters are encoded according to
the specified eol-style symbol, and all other characters that
participate in possible line endings are encoded as is.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Only the name of @meta{eol-style symbol} is significant.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure native--eol--style
Return the default end--of--line style of the underlying platform, e.g.,
@code{lf} on Unix and @code{crlf} on Windows.
@end deffn


@tindex i/o-decoding
@deffn {Condition Type} {i/o-decoding}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-decoding-error} @var{port}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-decoding-error?} @var{obj}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-decoding &i/o-port
  make-i/o-decoding-error i/o-decoding-error?)
@end example

An exception with this type is raised when one of the operations for
textual input from a port encounters a sequence of bytes that cannot be
translated into a character or string by the input direction of the
port's transcoder.

When such an exception is raised, the port's position is past the
invalid encoding.
@end deffn


@tindex i/o-encoding
@deffn {Condition Type} {i/o-encoding}
@deffnx Procedure {make-i/o-encoding-error} @var{pobj} @var{cobj}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-encoding-error?} @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure {i/o-encoding-error-char} @var{condition}
This condition type could be defined by:

@example
(define-condition-type &i/o-encoding &i/o-port
  make-i/o-encoding-error i/o-encoding-error?
  (char i/o-encoding-error-char))
@end example

An exception with this type is raised when one of the operations for
textual output to a port encounters a character that cannot be
translated into bytes by the output direction of the port's transcoder.
@var{cobj} is the character that could not be encoded.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax error-handling-mode @meta{error-handling-mode symbol}
@meta{error-handling-mode symbol} should be a symbol whose name is one
of @code{ignore}, @code{raise}, and @code{replace}.

The form evaluates to the corresponding symbol.  If
@meta{error-handling-mode symbol} is not one of these identifiers,
effect and result are implementation--dependent: The result may be an
error--handling--mode symbol acceptable as a @var{handling-mode}
argument to @func{make-transcoder}.  If it is not acceptable as a
@var{handling-mode} argument to @func{make-transcoder}, an exception is
raised.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Only the name of @meta{error-handling-style symbol} is
significant.
@end quotation

The error--handling mode of a transcoder specifies the behavior of
textual I/O operations in the presence of encoding or decoding errors.

If a textual input operation encounters an invalid or incomplete
character encoding, and the error--handling mode is @code{ignore}, an
appropriate number of bytes of the invalid encoding are ignored and
decoding continues with the following bytes.  If the error--handling
mode is @code{replace}, the replacement character @code{U+FFFD} is
injected into the data stream, an appropriate number of bytes are
ignored, and decoding continues with the following bytes.  If the
error--handling mode is @code{raise}, an exception with condition type
@code{&i/o-decoding} is raised.

If a textual output operation encounters a character it cannot encode,
and the error--handling mode is @code{ignore}, the character is ignored
and encoding continues with the next character.  If the error--handling
mode is @code{replace}, a codec--specific replacement character is
emitted by the transcoder, and encoding continues with the next
character.  The replacement character is @code{U+FFFD} for transcoders
whose codec is one of the Unicode encodings, but is the @code{?}
character for the Latin--1 encoding.  If the error--handling mode is
@code{raise}, an exception with condition type @code{&i/o-encoding} is
raised.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-transcoder @var{codec}
@deffnx Procedure make-transcoder @var{codec} @var{eol-style}
@deffnx Procedure make-transcoder @var{codec} @var{eol-style} @var{handling-mode}
@var{codec} must be a codec; @var{eol-style}, if present, an eol--style
symbol; and @var{handling-mode}, if present, an error--handling--mode
symbol.

@var{eol-style} may be omitted, in which case it defaults to the native
end--of--line style of the underlying platform.  @var{handling-mode} may
be omitted, in which case it defaults to @code{replace}.  The result is
a transcoder with the behavior specified by its arguments.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure native-transcoder
Return an implementation--dependent transcoder that represents a
possibly locale-dependent ``native'' transcoding.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure transcoder-codec @var{transcoder}
@deffnx Procedure transcoder-eol-style @var{transcoder}
@deffnx Procedure transcoder-error-handling-mode @var{transcoder}
These are accessors for transcoder objects; when applied to a transcoder
returned by @func{make-transcoder}, they return the @var{codec},
@var{eol-style}, and @var{handling-mode} arguments, respectively.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {bytevector->string} @var{bytevector} @var{transcoder}
Return the string that results from transcoding the @var{bytevector}
according to the input direction of the transcoder.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {string->bytevector} @var{string} @var{transcoder}
Return the bytevector that results from transcoding the @var{string}
according to the output direction of the transcoder.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port eof object
@subsubsection End--of--file object


The end--of--file object is returned by various I/O procedures when they
reach end of file.


@deffn Procedure eof-object
Return the end--of--file object.

@example
(eqv? (eof-object) (eof-object))        @result{} #t
(eq? (eof-object) (eof-object))         @result{} #t
@end example
@end deffn

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The end--of--file object is not a datum value, and thus has
no external representation.
@end quotation


@deffn Procedure {eof-object?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is the end--of--file object, @false{}
otherwise.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port io ports
@subsubsection Input and output ports


The operations described in this section are common to input and output
ports, both binary and textual.  A port may also have an associated
@emph{position} that specifies a particular place within its data sink
or source, and may also provide operations for inspecting and setting
that place.


@deffn Procedure {port?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if the argument is a port, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure port-transcoder @var{port}
Return the transcoder associated with @var{port} if @var{port} is
textual and has an associated transcoder, and returns @false{} if
@var{port} is binary or does not have an associated transcoder.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {textual-port?} @var{port}
@deffnx Procedure {binary-port?} @var{port}
The @func{textual-port?} procedure returns @true{} if @var{port} is
textual, and returns @false{} otherwise.

The @func{binary-port?}  procedure returns @true{} if @var{port} is
binary, and returns @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {transcoded-port} @var{binary-port} @var{transcoder}
The @func{transcoded-port} procedure returns a new textual port with the
specified @var{transcoder}.  Otherwise the new textual port's state is
largely the same as that of @var{binary-port}.

If @var{binary-port} is an input port, the new textual port will be an
input port and will transcode the bytes that have not yet been read from
@var{binary-port}.  If @var{binary-port} is an output port, the new
textual port will be an output port and will transcode output characters
into bytes that are written to the byte sink represented by
@var{binary-port}.

As a side effect, however, @func{transcoded-port} closes
@var{binary-port} in a special way that allows the new textual port to
continue to use the byte source or sink represented by
@var{binary-port}, even though @var{binary-port} itself is closed and
cannot be used by the input and output operations described in this
chapter.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {port-has-port-position?} @var{port}
@deffnx Procedure port-position @var{port}
The @func{port-has-port-position?} procedure returns @true{} if the port
supports the @func{port-position} operation, and @false{} otherwise.

For a binary port, the @func{port-position} procedure returns the index
of the position at which the next byte would be read from or written to
the port as an exact non--negative integer object.  For a textual port,
@func{port-position} returns a value of some implementation--dependent
type representing the port's position; this value may be useful only as
the @var{pos} argument to @func{set-port-position!}, if the latter is
supported on the port (see below).

If the port does not support the operation, @func{port-position} raises
an exception with condition type @code{&assertion}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} For a textual port, the port position may or may not be an
integer object.  If it is an integer object, the integer object does not
necessarily correspond to a byte or character position.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {port-has-set-port-position!?} @var{port}
@deffnx Procedure {set-port-position!} @var{port} @var{pos}
If @var{port} is a binary port, @var{pos} should be a non--negative
exact integer object.  If @var{port} is a textual port, @var{pos} should
be the return value of a call to @func{port-position} on @var{port}.

The @func{port-has-set-port-position!?} procedure returns @true{} if the
port supports the @func{set-port-position!} operation, and @false{}
otherwise.

The @func{set-port-position!} procedure raises an exception with
condition type @code{&assertion} if the port does not support the
operation, and an exception with condition type
@code{&i/o-invalid-position} if @var{pos} is not in the range of valid
positions of @var{port}.  Otherwise, it sets the current position of the
port to @var{pos}.  If @var{port} is an output port,
@func{set-port-position!} first flushes @var{port}.

If @var{port} is a binary output port and the current position is set
beyond the current end of the data in the underlying data sink, the
object is not extended until new data is written at that position.  The
contents of any intervening positions are unspecified.  Binary ports
created by @func{open-file-output-port} and
@func{open-file-input/output-port} can always be extended in this manner
within the limits of the underlying operating system.  In other cases,
attempts to set the port beyond the current end of data in the
underlying object may result in an exception with condition type
@code{&i/o-invalid-position}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure close-port @var{port}
Closes the port, rendering the port incapable of delivering or accepting
data. If @var{port} is an output port, it is flushed before being
closed.  This has no effect if the port has already been closed.  A
closed port is still a port.  The @func{close-port} procedure returns
unspecified values.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure call-with-port @var{port} @var{proc}
@var{proc} must accept one argument.  The @func{call-with-port}
procedure calls @var{proc} with @var{port} as an argument.  If
@var{proc} returns, @var{port} is closed automatically and the values
returned by @var{proc} are returned.  If @var{proc} does not return,
@var{port} is not closed automatically, except perhaps when it is
possible to prove that @var{port} will never again be used for an input
or output operation.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port input ports
@subsubsection Input ports


An input port allows the reading of an infinite sequence of bytes or
characters punctuated by end--of--file objects.  An input port connected
to a finite data source ends in an infinite sequence of end--of--file
objects.

It is unspecified whether a character encoding consisting of several
bytes may have an end of file between the bytes.  If, for example,
@func{get-char} raises an @code{&i/o-decoding} exception because the
character encoding at the port's position is incomplete up to the next
end of file, a subsequent call to @func{get-char} may successfully
decode a character if bytes completing the encoding are available after
the end of file.


@deffn Procedure {input-port?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if the argument is an input port (or a combined input and
output port), and returns @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {port-eof?} @var{input-port}
Return @true{} if the @func{lookahead-u8} procedure (if @var{input-port}
is a binary port) or the @func{lookahead-char} procedure (if
@var{input-port} is a textual port) would return the end--of--file
object, and @false{} otherwise.  The operation may block indefinitely if
no data is available but the port cannot be determined to be at end of
file.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {open-file-input-port} @var{filename}
@deffnx Procedure {open-file-input-port} @var{filename} @var{file-options}
@deffnx Procedure {open-file-input-port} @var{filename} @var{file-options} @var{buffer-mode}
@deffnx Procedure {open-file-input-port} @var{filename} @var{file-options} @var{buffer-mode} @var{maybe-transcoder}
@var{maybe-transcoder} must be either a transcoder or @false{}.

The @func{open-file-input-port} procedure returns an input port for the
named file.  The @var{file-options} and @var{maybe-transcoder} arguments
are optional.

The @var{file-options} argument, which may determine various aspects of
the returned port, defaults to the value of @code{(file-options)}.

The @var{buffer-mode} argument, if supplied, must be one of the symbols
that name a buffer mode.  The @var{buffer-mode} argument defaults to
@code{block}.

If @var{maybe-transcoder} is a transcoder, it becomes the transcoder
associated with the returned port.

If @var{maybe-transcoder} is @false{} or absent, the port will be a
binary port and will support the @func{port-position} and
@func{set-port-position!} operations.  Otherwise the port will be a
textual port, and whether it supports the @func{port-position} and
@func{set-port-position!} operations is implementation-dependent (and
possibly transcoder-dependent).
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {open-bytevector-input-port} @var{bytevector}
@deffnx Procedure {open-bytevector-input-port} @var{bytevector} @var{maybe-transcoder}
@var{maybe-transcoder} must be either a transcoder or @false{}.

The @func{open-bytevector-input-port} procedure returns an input port
whose bytes are drawn from @var{bytevector}.  If @var{transcoder} is
specified, it becomes the transcoder associated with the returned port.

If @var{maybe-transcoder} is @false{} or absent, the port will be a
binary port and will support the @func{port-position} and
@func{set-port-position!} operations.  Otherwise the port will be a
textual port, and whether it supports the @func{port-position} and
@func{set-port-position!} operations will be implementation--dependent
(and possibly transcoder--dependent).

If @var{bytevector} is modified after @code{open-bytevector-input-port}
has been called, the effect on the returned port is unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {open-string-input-port} @var{string}
Return a textual input port whose characters are drawn from
@var{string}.  The port may or may not have an associated transcoder; if
it does, the transcoder is implementation--dependent.  The port should
support the @func{port-position} and @func{set-port-position!}
operations.

If @var{string} is modified after @func{open-string-input-port} has been
called, the effect on the returned port is unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {standard-input-port}
Return a fresh binary input port connected to standard input.  Whether
the port supports the @func{port-position} and @func{set-port-position!}
operations is implementation--dependent.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {current-input-port}
This returns a default textual port for input.  Normally, this default
port is associated with standard input, but can be dynamically
re--assigned using the @func{with-input-from-file} procedure from the
@rsixlibrary{io simple} library.  The port may or may not have an
associated transcoder; if it does, the transcoder is
implementation--dependent.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-custom-binary-input-port @var{id} @var{read!} @var{get-position} @var{set-position!} @var{close}
Return a newly created binary input port whose byte source is an
arbitrary algorithm represented by the @func{read!} procedure.  @var{id}
must be a string naming the new port, provided for informational
purposes only.  @var{read!} must be a procedure and should behave as
specified below; it will be called by operations that perform binary
input.

Each of the remaining arguments may be @false{}; if any of those
arguments is not @false{}, it must be a procedure and should behave as
specified below.

@table @code
@item (@var{read!} @var{bytevector} @var{start} @var{count})
@var{start} will be a non--negative exact integer object, @var{count}
will be a positive exact integer object, and @var{bytevector} will be a
bytevector whose length is at least @var{start}+@var{count}.

The @var{read!} procedure should obtain up to @var{count} bytes from the
byte source, and should write those bytes into @var{bytevector} starting
at index @var{start}.  The @var{read!} procedure should return an exact
integer object.  This integer object should represent the number of
bytes that it has read.  To indicate an end of file, the @var{read!}
procedure should write no bytes and return 0.

@item (@var{get-position})
The @var{get-position} procedure (if supplied) should return an exact
integer object representing the current position of the input port.  If
not supplied, the custom port will not support the @func{port-position}
operation.

@item (@var{set-position!} @var{pos})
@var{pos} will be a non--negative exact integer object.  The
@var{set-position!} procedure (if supplied) should set the position of
the input port to @var{pos}.  If not supplied, the custom port will not
support the @func{set-port-position!} operation.

@item (@var{close})
The @var{close} procedure (if supplied) should perform any actions that
are necessary when the input port is closed.
@end table

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the return values of @var{read!} and @var{get-position} only when it
actually calls them as part of an I/O operation requested by the
program.  The implementation is not required to check that these
procedures otherwise behave as described.  If they do not, however, the
behavior of the resulting port is unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-custom-textual-input-port @var{id} @var{read!} @var{get-position} @var{set-position!} @var{close}
Return a newly created textual input port whose character source is an
arbitrary algorithm represented by the @var{read!} procedure.  @var{id}
must be a string naming the new port, provided for informational
purposes only.  @var{read!} must be a procedure and should behave as
specified below; it will be called by operations that perform textual
input.

Each of the remaining arguments may be @false{}; if any of those
arguments is not @false{}, it must be a procedure and should behave as
specified below.

@table @code
@item (@var{read!} @var{string} @var{start} @var{count})
@var{start} will be a non--negative exact integer object, @var{count}
will be a positive exact integer object, and @var{string} will be a
string whose length is at least @var{start}+@var{count}.

The @var{read!} procedure should obtain up to @var{count} characters
from the character source, and should write those characters into
@var{string} starting at index @var{start}.  The @var{read!} procedure
should return an exact integer object representing the number of
characters that it has written.  To indicate an end of file, the
@var{read!}  procedure should write no bytes and return 0.

@item (@var{get-position})
The @var{get-position} procedure (if supplied) should return a single
value.  The return value should represent the current position of the
input port.  If not supplied, the custom port will not support the
@func{port-position} operation.

@item (@var{set-position!} @var{pos})
The @var{set-position!} procedure (if supplied) should set the position
of the input port to @var{pos} if @var{pos} is the return value of a
call to @var{get-position}.  If not supplied, the custom port will not
support the @func{set-port-position!} operation.

@item (@var{close})
The @var{close} procedure (if supplied) should perform any actions that
are necessary when the input port is closed.
@end table

The port may or may not have an an associated transcoder; if it does,
the transcoder is implementation--dependent.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the return values of @var{read!} and @var{get-position} only when it
actually calls them as part of an I/O operation requested by the
program.  The implementation is not required to check that these
procedures otherwise behave as described.  If they do not, however, the
behavior of the resulting port is unspecified.
@end deffn

@c page
@node stdlib io port binary input
@subsubsection Binary input


@deffn Procedure get-u8 @var{binary-input-port}
Read from @var{binary-input-port}, blocking as necessary, until a byte
is available from @var{binary-input-port} or until an end of file is
reached.  If a byte becomes available, @code{get-u8} returns the byte as
an octet and updates @var{binary-input-port} to point just past that
byte. If no input byte is seen before an end of file is reached, the
end--of--file object is returned.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure lookahead-u8 @var{binary-input-port}
The @func{lookahead-u8} procedure is like @code{get-u8}, but it does not
update @var{binary-input-port} to point past the byte.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure get-bytevector-n @var{binary-input-port} @var{count}
@var{count} must be an exact, non--negative integer object representing
the number of bytes to be read.

The @func{get-bytevector-n} procedure reads from
@var{binary-input-port}, blocking as necessary, until @var{count} bytes
are available from @var{binary-input-port} or until an end of file is
reached.

If @var{count} bytes are available before an end of file,
@func{get-bytevector-n} returns a bytevector of size @var{count}.

If fewer bytes are available before an end of file,
@func{get-bytevector-n} returns a bytevector containing those bytes. In
either case, the input port is updated to point just past the bytes
read.

If an end of file is reached before any bytes are available,
@func{get-bytevector-n} returns the end--of--file object.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {get-bytevector-n!} @var{binary-input-port} @var{bytevector} @var{start} @var{count}
@var{count} must be an exact, non--negative integer object, representing
the number of bytes to be read. @var{bytevector} must be a bytevector
with at least @var{start}+@var{count} elements.

The @func{get-bytevector-n!} procedure reads from
@var{binary-input-port}, blocking as necessary, until @var{count} bytes
are available from @var{binary-input-port} or until an end of file is
reached.

If @var{count} bytes are available before an end of file, they are
written into @var{bytevector} starting at index @var{start}, and the
result is @var{count}.

If fewer bytes are available before the next end of file, the available
bytes are written into @var{bytevector} starting at index @var{start},
and the result is a number object representing the number of bytes
actually read.

In either case, the input port is updated to point just past the bytes
read. If an end of file is reached before any bytes are available,
@func{get-bytevector-n!} returns the end--of--file object.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure get-bytevector-some @var{binary-input-port}
Read from @var{binary-input-port}, blocking as necessary, until bytes
are available from @var{binary-input-port} or until an end of file is
reached.  If bytes become available, @func{get-bytevector-some} returns
a freshly allocated bytevector containing the initial available bytes
(at least one), and it updates @var{binary-input-port} to point just
past these bytes.  If no input bytes are seen before an end of file is
reached, the end--of--file object is returned.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure get-bytevector-all @var{binary-input-port}
Attempts to read all bytes until the next end of file, blocking as
necessary.  If one or more bytes are read, @func{get-bytevector-all}
returns a bytevector containing all bytes up to the next end of file.
Otherwise, @func{get-bytevector-all} returns the end--of--file object.
The operation may block indefinitely waiting to see if more bytes will
become available, even if some bytes are already available.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port textual input
@subsubsection Textual input


@deffn Procedure get-char @var{textual-input-port}
Read from @var{textual-input-port}, blocking as necessary, until a
complete character is available from @var{textual-input-port}, or until
an end of file is reached.

If a complete character is available before the next end of file,
@func{get-char} returns that character and updates the input port to
point past the character. If an end of file is reached before any
character is read, @func{get-char} returns the end--of--file object.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure lookahead-char @var{textual-input-port}
The @func{lookahead-char} procedure is like @func{get-char}, but it does
not update @var{textual-input-port} to point past the character.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} With some of the standard transcoders described in this
document, up to four bytes of lookahead are needed.  Non--standard
transcoders may need even more lookahead.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure get-string-n @var{textual-input-port} @var{count}
@var{count} must be an exact, non--negative integer object, representing
the number of characters to be read.

The @func{get-string-n} procedure reads from @var{textual-input-port},
blocking as necessary, until @var{count} characters are available, or
until an end of file is reached.

If @var{count} characters are available before end of file,
@func{get-string-n} returns a string consisting of those @var{count}
characters.

If fewer characters are available before an end of file, but one or more
characters can be read, @func{get-string-n} returns a string containing
those characters.

In either case, the input port is updated to point just past the
characters read. If no characters can be read before an end of file, the
end-of-file object is returned.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {get-string-n!} @var{textual-input-port} @var{string} @var{start} @var{count}
@var{start} and @var{count} must be exact, non--negative integer
objects, with @var{count} representing the number of characters to be
read.  @var{string} must be a string with at least
@var{start}+@var{count} characters.

The @func{get-string-n!} procedure reads from @var{textual-input-port}
in the same manner as @func{get-string-n}.

If @var{count} characters are available before an end of file, they are
written into @var{string} starting at index @var{start}, and @var{count}
is returned.

If fewer characters are available before an end of file, but one or more
can be read, those characters are written into @var{string} starting at
index @var{start} and the number of characters actually read is returned
as an exact integer object.

If no characters can be read before an end of file, the end--of--file
object is returned.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure get-string-all @var{textual-input-port}
Read from @var{textual-input-port} until an end of file, decoding
characters in the same manner as @func{get-string-n} and
@func{get-string-n!}.

If characters are available before the end of file, a string containing
all the characters decoded from that data are returned.  If no character
precedes the end of file, the end--of--file object is returned.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure get-line @var{textual-input-port}
Read from @var{textual-input-port} up to and including the linefeed
character or end of file, decoding characters in the same manner as
@func{get-string-n} and @func{get-string-n!}.

If a linefeed character is read, a string containing all of the text up
to (but not including) the linefeed character is returned, and the port
is updated to point just past the linefeed character.

If an end of file is encountered before any linefeed character is read,
but some characters have been read and decoded as characters, a string
containing those characters is returned.

If an end of file is encountered before any characters are read, the
end--of--file object is returned.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The end--of--line style, if not @code{none}, will cause all
line endings to be read as linefeed characters.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure get-datum @var{textual-input-port}
Read an external representation from @var{textual-input-port} and
returns the datum it represents.  The @func{get-datum} procedure returns
the next datum that can be parsed from the given
@var{textual-input-port}, updating @var{textual-input-port} to point
exactly past the end of the external representation of the object.

Any @meta{interlexeme space} (@ref{lang lex syntax}) in the input is
first skipped.  If an end of file occurs after the @meta{interlexeme
space}, the end--of--file object is returned.

If a character inconsistent with an external representation is
encountered in the input, an exception with condition types
@code{&lexical} and @code{&i/o-read} is raised.

Also, if the end of file is encountered after the beginning of an
external representation, but the external representation is incomplete
and therefore cannot be parsed, an exception with condition types
@code{&lexical} and @code{&i/o-read} is raised.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port output ports
@subsubsection Output ports


An output port is a sink to which bytes or characters are written.  The
written data may control external devices or may produce files and other
objects that may subsequently be opened for input.


@deffn Procedure {output-port?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if the argument is an output port (or a combined input
and output port), @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {flush-output-port} @var{output-port}
Flushe any buffered output from the buffer of @var{output-port} to the
underlying file, device, or object.  The @func{flush-output-port}
procedure returns unspecified values.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {output-port-buffer-mode} @var{output-port}
Return the symbol that represents the buffer mode of @var{output-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure open-file-output-port @var{filename}
@deffnx Procedure open-file-output-port @var{filename} @var{file-options}
@deffnx Procedure open-file-output-port @var{filename} @var{file-options} @var{buffer-mode}
@deffnx Procedure open-file-output-port @var{filename} @var{file-options} @var{buffer-mode} @var{maybe-transcoder}
@var{maybe-transcoder} must be either a transcoder or @false{}.

The @func{open-file-output-port} procedure returns an output port for
the named file.

The @var{file-options} argument, which may determine various aspects of
the returned port, defaults to the value of @code{(file-options)}.

The @var{buffer-mode} argument, if supplied, must be one of the symbols
that name a buffer mode.  The @var{buffer-mode} argument defaults to
@code{block}.

If @var{maybe-transcoder} is a transcoder, it becomes the transcoder
associated with the port.

If @var{maybe-transcoder} is @false{} or absent, the port will be a
binary port and will support the @func{port-position} and
@func{set-port-position!}  operations.  Otherwise the port will be a
textual port, and whether it supports the @func{port-position} and
@func{set-port-position!} operations is implementation--dependent (and
possibly transcoder--dependent).
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure open-bytevector-output-port
@deffnx Procedure open-bytevector-output-port @var{maybe-transcoder}
@var{maybe-transcoder} must be either a transcoder or @false{}.

The @func{open-bytevector-output-port} procedure returns two values: an
output port and an extraction procedure.  The output port accumulates
the bytes written to it for later extraction by the procedure.

If @var{maybe-transcoder} is a transcoder, it becomes the transcoder
associated with the port.  If @var{maybe-transcoder} is @false{} or
absent, the port will be a binary port and will support the
@func{port-position} and @func{set-port-position!}  operations.
Otherwise the port will be a textual port, and whether it supports the
@code{port-position} and @func{set-port-position!} operations is
implementation--dependent (and possibly transcoder--dependent).

The extraction procedure takes no arguments.  When called, it returns a
bytevector consisting of all the port's accumulated bytes (regardless of
the port's current position), removes the accumulated bytes from the
port, and resets the port's position.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure call-with-bytevector-output-port @var{proc}
@deffnx Procedure call-with-bytevector-output-port @var{proc} @var{maybe-transcoder}
@var{proc} must accept one argument.  @var{maybe-transcoder} must be
either a transcoder or @false{}.

The @func{call-with-bytevector-output-port} procedure creates an output
port that accumulates the bytes written to it and calls @var{proc} with
that output port as an argument.

Whenever @var{proc} returns, a bytevector consisting of all of the
port's accumulated bytes (regardless of the port's current position) is
returned and the port is closed.

The transcoder associated with the output port is determined as for a
call to @func{open-bytevector-output-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure open-string-output-port
Return two values: a textual output port and an extraction procedure.
The output port accumulates the characters written to it for later
extraction by the procedure.

The port may or may not have an associated transcoder; if it does, the
transcoder is implementation-dependent.  The port should support the
@func{port-position} and @func{set-port-position!} operations.

The extraction procedure takes no arguments.  When called, it returns a
string consisting of all of the port's accumulated characters
(regardless of the current position), removes the accumulated characters
from the port, and resets the port's position.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure call-with-string-output-port @var{proc}
@var{proc} must accept one argument.

The @func{call-with-string-output-port} procedure creates a textual
output port that accumulates the characters written to it and calls
@var{proc} with that output port as an argument.

Whenever @var{proc} returns, a string consisting of all of the port's
accumulated characters (regardless of the port's current position) is
returned and the port is closed.

The port may or may not have an associated transcoder; if it does, the
transcoder is implementation-dependent.  The port should support the
@func{port-position} and @func{set-port-position!} operations.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure standard-output-port
@deffnx Procedure standard-error-port
Return a fresh binary output port connected to the standard output or
standard error respectively.  Whether the port supports the
@func{port-position} and @func{set-port-position!} operations is
implementation--dependent.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure current-output-port
@deffnx Procedure current-error-port
These return default textual ports for regular output and error output.
Normally, these default ports are associated with standard output, and
standard error, respectively.

The return value of @func{current-output-port} can be dynamically
re--assigned using the @func{with-output-to-file} procedure from the
@rsixlibrary{io simple} library.  A port returned by one of these
procedures may or may not have an associated transcoder; if it does, the
transcoder is implementation--dependent.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-custom-binary-output-port @var{id} @var{write!} @var{get-position} @var{set-position!} @var{close}
Return a newly created binary output port whose byte sink is an
arbitrary algorithm represented by the @var{write!} procedure.  @var{id}
must be a string naming the new port, provided for informational
purposes only.  @var{write!} must be a procedure and should behave as
specified below; it will be called by operations that perform binary
output.

Each of the remaining arguments may be @false{}; if any of those
arguments is not @false{}, it must be a procedure and should behave as
specified in the description of @func{make-custom-binary-input-port}.

@table @code
@item (@var{write!} @var{bytevector} @var{start} @var{count})
@var{start} and @var{count} will be non-negative exact integer objects,
and @var{bytevector} will be a bytevector whose length is at least
@var{start}+@var{count}.

The @var{write!} procedure should write up to @var{count} bytes from
@var{bytevector} starting at index @var{start} to the byte sink.  In any
case, the @var{write!} procedure should return the number of bytes that
it wrote, as an exact integer object.
@end table

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the return values of @var{write!} only when it actually calls
@var{write!} as part of an I/O operation requested by the program.  The
implementation is not required to check that @var{write!} otherwise
behaves as described.  If it does not, however, the behavior of the
resulting port is unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-custom-textual-output-port @var{id} @var{write!} @var{get-position} @var{set-position!} @var{close}
Return a newly created textual output port whose byte sink is an
arbitrary algorithm represented by the @var{write!} procedure.  @var{Id}
must be a string naming the new port, provided for informational
purposes only.  @var{write!} must be a procedure and should behave as
specified below; it will be called by operations that perform textual
output.

Each of the remaining arguments may be @false{}; if any of those
arguments is not @false{}, it must be a procedure and should behave as
specified in the description of @func{make-custom-textual-input-port}.

@table @code
@item (@var{write!} @var{string} @var{start} @var{count})
@var{start} and @var{count} will be non--negative exact integer objects,
and @var{string} will be a string whose length is at least
@var{start}+@var{count}.

The @var{write!} procedure should write up to @var{count} characters
from @var{string} starting at index @var{start} to the character sink.
In any case, the @var{write!} procedure should return the number of
characters that it wrote, as an exact integer object.
@end table

The port may or may not have an associated transcoder; if it does, the
transcoder is implementation--dependent.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the return values of @var{write!} only when it actually calls
@var{write!} as part of an I/O operation requested by the program.  The
implementation is not required to check that @var{write!} otherwise
behaves as described.  If it does not, however, the behavior of the
resulting port is unspecified.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port binary output
@subsubsection Binary output


@deffn Procedure put-u8 @var{binary-output-port} @var{octet}
Write @var{octet} to the output port and returns unspecified values.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure put-bytevector @var{binary-output-port} @var{bytevector}
@deffnx Procedure put-bytevector @var{binary-output-port} @var{bytevector} @var{start}
@deffnx Procedure put-bytevector @var{binary-output-port} @var{bytevector} @var{start} @var{count}
@var{start} and @var{count} must be non--negative exact integer objects
that default to 0 and:

@example
(- (bytevector-length @var{bytevector}) @var{start})
@end example

@noindent
respectively.  @var{bytevector} must have a length of at least
@var{start}+@var{count}.  The @func{put-bytevector} procedure writes the
@var{count} bytes of the bytevector @var{bytevector} starting at index
@var{start} to the output port.  The @func{put-bytevector} procedure
returns unspecified values.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port textual output
@subsubsection Textual output


@deffn Procedure put-char @var{textual-output-port} @var{char}
Write @var{char} to the port. The @func{put-char} procedure returns
unspecified values.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure put-string @var{textual-output-port} @var{string}
@deffnx Procedure put-string @var{textual-output-port} @var{string} @var{start}
@deffnx Procedure put-string @var{textual-output-port} @var{string} @var{start} @var{count}
@var{start} and @var{count} must be non--negative exact integer objects.
@var{String} must have a length of at least @var{start}+@var{count}.

@var{start} defaults to 0.  @var{count} defaults to:

@example
(- (string-length @var{string}) @var{start})
@end example

The @func{put-string} procedure writes the @var{count} characters of
@var{string} starting at index @var{start} to the port.  The
@func{put-string} procedure returns unspecified values.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure put-datum @var{textual-output-port} @var{datum}
@var{datum} should be a datum value.

The @func{put-datum} procedure writes an external representation of
@var{datum} to @var{textual-output-port}.  The specific external
representation is implementation--dependent.  However, whenever
possible, an implementation should produce a representation for which
@func{get-datum}, when reading the representation, will return an object
equal (in the sense of @func{equal?}) to @var{datum}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Not all datums may allow producing an external
representation for which @func{get-datum} will produce an object that is
equal to the original.  Specifically, NaNs contained in @var{datum} may
make this impossible.
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The @func{put-datum} procedure merely writes the external
representation, but no trailing delimiter.  If @func{put-datum} is used
to write several subsequent external representations to an output port,
care should be taken to delimit them properly so they can be read back
in by subsequent calls to @func{get-datum}.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io port input output ports
@subsubsection Input/output ports


@deffn Procedure {open-file-input/output-port} @var{filename}
@deffnx Procedure {open-file-input/output-port} @var{filename} @var{file-options}
@deffnx Procedure {open-file-input/output-port} @var{filename} @var{file-options} @var{buffer-mode}
@deffnx Procedure {open-file-input/output-port} @var{filename} @var{file-options} @var{buffer-mode} @var{transcoder}
Return a single port that is both an input port and an output port for
the named file.  The optional arguments default as described in the
specification of @func{open-file-output-port}.  If the input/output port
supports @func{port-position} and/or @func{set-port-position!}, the same
port position is used for both input and output.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {make-custom-binary-input/output-port} @var{id} @var{read!} @var{write!} @var{get-position} @var{set-position!} @var{close}
Return a newly created binary input/output port whose byte source and
sink are arbitrary algorithms represented by the @var{read!} and
@var{write!}  procedures.

@var{id} must be a string naming the new port, provided for
informational purposes only.

@var{read!} and @var{write!} must be procedures, and should behave as
specified for the @func{make-custom-binary-input-port} and
@func{make-custom-binary-output-port} procedures.

Each of the remaining arguments may be @false{}; if any of those
arguments is not @false{}, it must be a procedure and should behave as
specified in the description of @func{make-custom-binary-input-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {make-custom-textual-input/output-port} @var{id} @var{read!} @var{write!} @var{get-position} @var{set-position!} @var{close}
Return a newly created textual input/output port whose textual source
and sink are arbitrary algorithms represented by the @var{read!} and
@var{write!}  procedures.

@var{id} must be a string naming the new port, provided for
informational purposes only.

@var{read!} and @var{write!} must be procedures, and should behave as
specified for the @func{make-custom-textual-input-port} and
@func{make-custom-textual-output-port} procedures.

Each of the remaining arguments may be @false{}; if any of those
arguments is not @false{}, it must be a procedure and should behave as
specified in the description of @func{make-custom-textual-input-port}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib io simple
@subsection Simple input/output


This section describes the @rsixlibrary{io simple} library, which
provides a somewhat more convenient interface for performing textual I/O
on ports.  This library implements most of the I/O procedures of the
previous revision of this report.

The ports created by the procedures of this library are textual ports
associated implementation--dependent transcoders.


@deffn Procedure {eof-object}
@deffnx Procedure {eof-object?} @var{obj}
These are the same as @func{eof-object} and @func{eof-object?} from the
@rsixlibrary{ports} library.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure call-with-input-file @var{filename} @var{proc}
@deffnx Procedure call-with-output-file @var{filename} @var{proc}
@var{proc} should accept one argument.

These procedures open the file named by @var{filename} for input or for
output, with no specified file options, and call @var{proc} with the
obtained port as an argument.

If @var{proc} returns, the port is closed automatically and the values
returned by @var{proc} are returned.

If @var{proc} does not return, the port is not closed automatically,
unless it is possible to prove that the port will never again be used
for an I/O operation.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure input-port? @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure output-port? @var{obj}
These are the same as the @func{input-port?} and @func{output-port?}
procedures in the @rsixlibrary{io ports} library.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure current-input-port
@deffnx Procedure current-output-port
@deffnx Procedure current-error-port
These are the same as the @func{current-input-port},
@func{current-output-port}, and @func{current-error-port} procedures
from the @rsixlibrary{io ports} library.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure with-input-from-file @var{filename} @var{thunk}
@deffnx Procedure with-output-to-file @var{filename} @var{thunk}
@var{thunk} must be a procedure and must accept zero arguments.

The file is opened for input or output using empty file options, and
@var{thunk} is called with no arguments.

During the dynamic extent of the call to @var{thunk}, the obtained port
is made the value returned by @func{current-input-port} or
@func{current-output-port} procedures; the previous default values are
reinstated when the dynamic extent is exited.

When @var{thunk} returns, the port is closed automatically.  The values
returned by @var{thunk} are returned.

If an escape procedure is used to escape back into the call to
@var{thunk} after @var{thunk} is returned, the behavior is unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure open-input-file @var{filename}
Open @var{filename} for input, with empty file options, and returns the
obtained port.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure open-output-file @var{filename}
Open @var{filename} for output, with empty file options, and returns the
obtained port.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure close-input-port @var{input-port}
@deffnx Procedure close-output-port @var{output-port}
Close @var{input-port} or @var{output-port}, respectively.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure read-char
@deffnx Procedure read-char @var{textual-input-port}
Reads from @var{textual-input-port}, blocking as necessary until a
character is available from @var{textual-input-port}, or the data that
are available cannot be the prefix of any valid encoding, or an end of
file is reached.

If a complete character is available before the next end of file,
@func{read-char} returns that character, and updates the input port to
point past that character.

If an end of file is reached before any data are read, @func{read-char}
returns the end--of--file object.

If @var{textual-input-port} is omitted, it defaults to the value
returned by @func{current-input-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure peek-char
@deffnx Procedure peek-char @var{textual-input-port}
This is the same as @func{read-char}, but does not consume any data from
the port.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure read
@deffnx Procedure read @var{textual-input-port}
Read an external representation from @var{textual-input-port} and
returns the datum it represents.

The @func{read} procedure operates in the same way as @func{get-datum}.

If @var{textual-input-port} is omitted, it defaults to the value
returned by @func{current-input-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure write-char @var{char}
@deffnx Procedure write-char @var{char} @var{textual-output-port}
Write an encoding of the character @var{char} to the
@var{textual-output-port}, and returns unspecified values.

If @var{textual-output-port} is omitted, it defaults to the value
returned by @func{current-output-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure newline
@deffnx Procedure newline @var{textual-output-port}
This is equivalent to using @func{write-char} to write @code{#\linefeed}
to @var{textual-output-port}.

If @var{textual-output-port} is omitted, it defaults to the value
returned by @func{current-output-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure display @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure display @var{obj} @var{textual-output-port}
Write a representation of @var{obj} to the given
@var{textual-output-port}.

Strings that appear in the written representation are not enclosed in
doublequotes, and no characters are escaped within those strings.

Character objects appear in the representation as if written by
@func{write-char} instead of by @code{write}.

The @func{display} procedure returns unspecified values.

The @var{textual-output-port} argument may be omitted, in which case it
defaults to the value returned by @func{current-output-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure write @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure write @var{obj} @var{textual-output-port}
Write the external representation of @var{obj} to
@var{textual-output-port}.

The @func{write} procedure operates in the same way as @func{put-datum}.

If @var{textual-output-port} is omitted, it defaults to the value
returned by @func{current-output-port}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib files
@section File system


This chapter describes the @rsixlibrary{files} library for operations on
the file system.  This library, in addition to the procedures described
here, also exports the I/O condition types described in section
@ref{stdlib io conditions}.


@deffn Procedure {file-exists?} @var{filename}
@var{filename} must be a file name.

The @func{file-exists?} procedure returns @true{} if the named file
exists at the time the procedure is called, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure delete-file @var{filename}
@var{filename} must be a file name.

The @func{delete-file} procedure deletes the named file if it exists and
can be deleted, and returns unspecified values.  If the file does not
exist or cannot be deleted, an exception with condition type
@code{&i/o-filename} is raised.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib programlib
@section Command line access and exit values


The procedures described in this section are exported by the
@rsixlibrary{programs} library.


@deffn Procedure command-line
Return a nonempty list of strings.  The first element is an
implementation--specific name for the running top--level program.  The
remaining elements are command--line arguments according to the
operating system's conventions.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure exit
@deffnx Procedure exit @var{obj}
Exit the running program and communicates an exit value to the operating
system.

If no argument is supplied, the @func{exit} procedure should communicate
to the operating system that the program exited normally.

If an argument is supplied, the @func{exit} procedure should translate
the argument into an appropriate exit value for the operating system.
If @var{obj} is @false{}, the exit is assumed to be abnormal.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib arithmetics
@section Arithmetics


This chapter describes Scheme's libraries for more specialized numerical
operations: fixnum and flonum arithmetic, as well as bitwise operations
on exact integer objects.


@menu
* stdlib arithmetics bitwise::          Bitwise operations.
* stdlib arithmetics fixnum::           Fixnums.
* stdlib arithmetics flonum::           Flonums.
* stdlib arithmetics exact bitwise::    Exact bitwise arithmetic.
@end menu


@c page
@node stdlib arithmetics bitwise
@subsection Bitwise operations


A number of procedures operate on the binary two's--complement
representations of exact integer objects: Bit positions within an exact
integer object are counted from the right, i.e. bit 0 is the least
significant bit.  Some procedures allow extracting @emph{bit fields},
i.e., number objects representing subsequences of the binary
representation of an exact integer object.  Bit fields are always
positive, and always defined using a finite number of bits.


@c page
@node stdlib arithmetics fixnum
@subsection Fixnums


Every implementation must define its fixnum range as a closed interval:
@math{[-2^(w-1), 2^(w-1)-1]} such that @emph{w} is a (mathematical)
integer @math{w >= 24}.  Every mathematical integer within an
implementation's fixnum range must correspond to an exact integer object
that is representable within the implementation.  A fixnum is an exact
integer object whose value lies within this fixnum range.

This section describes the @rsixlibrary{arithmetic fixnums} library,
which defines various operations on fixnums.  Fixnum operations perform
integer arithmetic on their fixnum arguments, but raise an exception
with condition type @code{&implementation-restriction} if the result is
not a fixnum.

This section uses @var{fx}, @vari{fx}, @varii{fx}, etc., as names for
arguments that must be fixnums.


@deffn Procedure fixnum? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is an exact integer object within the fixnum
range, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure fixnum-width
@deffnx Procedure least-fixnum
@deffnx Procedure greatest-fixnum
These procedures return @math{w}, @math{-2^(w-1)} and @math{2^(w-1)-1}:
the width, minimum and the maximum value of the fixnum range,
respectively.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fx=?} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fx>?} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fx<?} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fx>=?} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fx<=?} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx} @dots{}
These procedures return @true{} if their arguments are (respectively):
equal, monotonically increasing, monotonically decreasing, monotonically
nondecreasing, or monotonically nonincreasing, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxzero?} @var{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxpositive?} @var{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxnegative?} @var{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxodd?} @var{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxeven?} @var{fx}
These numerical predicates test a fixnum for a particular property,
returning @true{} or @false{}.  The five properties tested by these
procedures are: whether the number object is zero, greater than zero,
less than zero, odd, or even.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxmax} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fxmin} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @dots{}
These procedures return the maximum or minimum of their arguments.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fx+} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fx*} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
These procedures return the sum or product of their arguments, provided
that sum or product is a fixnum.  An exception with condition type
@code{&implementation-restriction} is raised if that sum or product is
not a fixnum.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fx-} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fx-} @var{fx}
With two arguments, this procedure returns the difference
@math{@vari{fx} - @varii{fx}}, provided that difference is a fixnum.

With one argument, this procedure returns the additive inverse of its
argument, provided that integer object is a fixnum.

An exception with condition type @code{&implementation-restriction} is
raised if the mathematically correct result of this procedure is not a
fixnum.

@example
(fx- (least-fixnum))  @result{} exception &assertion
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxdiv-and-mod} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxdiv} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxmod} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxdiv0-and-mod0} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxdiv0} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxmod0} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@varii{fx} must be nonzero.

These procedures implement number--theoretic integer division and return
the results of the corresponding mathematical operations specified in
@ref{baselib math semantics integer,Integer division}

@example
(fxdiv @vari{fx} @varii{fx})         @result{} @vari{fx} div @varii{fx}
(fxmod @vari{fx} @varii{fx})         @result{} @vari{fx} mod @varii{fx}
(fxdiv-and-mod @vari{fx} @varii{fx}) @result{} @vari{fx} div @varii{fx}, @vari{fx} mod @varii{fx}
                                        ; two return values
(fxdiv0 @vari{fx} @varii{fx})        @result{} @vari{fx} div_0 @varii{fx}
(fxmod0 @vari{fx} @varii{fx})        @result{} @vari{fx} mod_0 @varii{fx}
(fxdiv0-and-mod0 @vari{fx} @varii{fx})
@result{} @vari{fx} @vari{fx} div_0 @varii{fx}, @vari{fx} mod_0 @varii{fx}
   ; two return values
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fx+/carry} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx}
Return the two fixnum results of the following computation:

@example
(let* ((s (+ @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx}))
       (s0 (mod0 s (expt 2 (fixnum-width))))
       (s1 (div0 s (expt 2 (fixnum-width)))))
  (values s0 s1))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fx-/carry} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx}
Return the two fixnum results of the following computation:

@example
(let* ((d (- @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx}))
       (d0 (mod0 d (expt 2 (fixnum-width))))
       (d1 (div0 d (expt 2 (fixnum-width)))))
  (values d0 d1))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fx*/carry} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx}
Return the two fixnum results of the following computation:

@example
(let* ((s (+ (* @vari{fx} @varii{fx}) @variii{fx}))
       (s0 (mod0 s (expt 2 (fixnum-width))))
       (s1 (div0 s (expt 2 (fixnum-width)))))
  (values s0 s1))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxnot} @var{fx}
Return the unique fixnum that is congruent mod @emph{2^w} to the
one's--complement of @var{fx}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxand} @vari{fx} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fxior} @vari{fx} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fxxor} @vari{fx} @dots{}
These procedures return the fixnum that is the bit--wise ``and'',
``inclusive or'', or ``exclusive or'' of the two's complement
representations of their arguments.  If they are passed only one
argument, they return that argument.  If they are passed no arguments,
they return the fixnum (either @emph{-1} or @emph{0}) that acts as
identity for the operation.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxif} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx}
Return the fixnum that is the bit--wise ``if'' of the two's complement
representations of its arguments, i.e. for each bit, if it is 1 in
@vari{fx}, the corresponding bit in @varii{fx} becomes the value of the
corresponding bit in the result, and if it is 0, the corresponding bit
in @variii{fx} becomes the corresponding bit in the value of the result.
This is the fixnum result of the following computation:

@example
(fxior (fxand @vari{fx} @varii{fx})
       (fxand (fxnot @vari{fx}) @variii{fx}))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxbit-count} @var{fx}
If @var{fx} is non--negative, this procedure returns the number of 1
bits in the two's complement representation of @var{fx}.  Otherwise it
returns the result of the following computation:

@example
(fxnot (fxbit-count (fxnot @var{ei})))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxlength} @var{fx}
Return the number of bits needed to represent @var{fx} if it is
positive, and the number of bits needed to represent @code{(fxnot
@var{fx})} if it is negative, which is the fixnum result of the
following computation:

@example
(do ((result 0 (+ result 1))
     (bits (if (fxnegative? @var{fx})
               (fxnot @var{fx})
               @var{fx})
           (fxarithmetic-shift-right bits 1)))
    ((fxzero? bits)
     result))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxfirst-bit-set} @var{fx}
Return the index of the least significant 1 bit in the two's complement
representation of @var{fx}.  If @var{fx} is 0, then -1 is returned.

@example
(fxfirst-bit-set 0)        @result{}  -1
(fxfirst-bit-set 1)        @result{}  0
(fxfirst-bit-set -4)       @result{}  2
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxbit-set?} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@varii{fx} must be non--negative and less than @code{(fixnum-width)}.

The @func{fxbit-set?} procedure returns @true{} if the @varii{fx}th bit
is 1 in the two's complement representation of @vari{fx}, and @false{}
otherwise.  This is the fixnum result of the following computation:

@example
(not
  (fxzero?
    (fxand @vari{fx}
           (fxarithmetic-shift-left 1 @varii{fx}))))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxcopy-bit} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx}
@varii{fx} must be non--negative and less than @code{(fixnum-width)}.
@variii{Fx} must be 0 or 1.

The @func{fxcopy-bit} procedure returns the result of replacing the
@varii{fx}th bit of @vari{fx} by @variii{fx}, which is the result of the
following computation:

@example
(let* ((mask (fxarithmetic-shift-left 1 @varii{fx})))
  (fxif mask
        (fxarithmetic-shift-left @variii{fx} @varii{fx})
        @vari{fx}))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxbit-field} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx}
@varii{fx} and @variii{fx} must be non-negative and less than
@code{(fixnum-width)}.  Moreover, @varii{fx} must be less than or equal
to @variii{fx}.

The @code{fxbit-field} procedure returns the number represented by the
bits at the positions from @varii{fx} (inclusive) to @variii{fx}
(exclusive), which is the fixnum result of the following computation:

@example
(let* ((mask (fxnot
              (fxarithmetic-shift-left -1 @variii{fx}))))
  (fxarithmetic-shift-right (fxand @vari{fx} mask)
                            @varii{fx}))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxcopy-bit-field} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx} @variv{fx}
@varii{fx} and @variii{fx} must be non-negative and less than
@code{(fixnum-width)}.  Moreover, @varii{fx} must be less than or equal
to @variii{fx}.

The @func{fxcopy-bit-field} procedure returns the result of replacing in
@vari{fx} the bits at positions from @varii{fx} (inclusive) to
@variii{fx} (exclusive) by the bits in @variv{fx} from position 0
(inclusive) to position @variii{fx}-@varii{fx} (exclusive), which is the
fixnum result of the following computation:

@example
(let* ((to    @vari{fx})
       (start @varii{fx})
       (end   @variii{fx})
       (from  @variv{fx})
       (mask1 (fxarithmetic-shift-left -1 start))
       (mask2 (fxnot (fxarithmetic-shift-left -1 end)))
       (mask  (fxand mask1 mask2))
       (mask3 (fxnot (fxarithmetic-shift-left -1 (- end start)))))
  (fxif mask
        (fxarithmetic-shift-left (fxand from mask3)
                                 start)
        to))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxarithmetic-shift} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
The absolute value of @varii{fx} must be less than
@code{(fixnum-width)}.

If:

@example
(floor (* @vari{fx} (expt 2 @varii{fx})))
@end example

@noindent
is a fixnum, then that fixnum is returned.  Otherwise an exception with
condition type @code{&implementation-restriction} is raised.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxarithmetic-shift-left} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@deffnx Procedure {fxarithmetic-shift-right} @vari{fx} @varii{fx}
@varii{fx} must be non--negative, and less than @code{(fixnum-width)}.


The @func{fxarithmetic-shift-left} procedure behaves the same as
@func{fxarithmetic-shift}, and @code{(fxarithmetic-shift-right @vari{fx}
@varii{fx})} behaves the same as @code{(fxarithmetic-shift @vari{fx}
(fx- @varii{fx}))}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxrotate-bit-field} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx} @variv{fx}
@varii{fx}, @variii{fx}, and @variv{fx} must be non--negative and less
than @code{(fixnum-width)}.  @varii{fx} must be less than or equal to
@variii{fx}.  @variv{fx} must be less than the difference between
@variii{fx} and @varii{fx}.

The @func{fxrotate-bit-field} procedure returns the result of cyclically
permuting in @vari{fx} the bits at positions from @varii{fx} (inclusive)
to @variii{fx} (exclusive) by @variv{fx} bits towards the more
significant bits, which is the result of the following computation:

@example
(let* ((n     @vari{fx})
       (start @varii{fx})
       (end   @variii{fx})
       (count @variv{fx})
       (width (fx- end start)))
  (if (fxpositive? width)
      (let* ((count (fxmod count width))
             (field0
               (fxbit-field n start end))
             (field1
               (fxarithmetic-shift-left
                 field0 count))
             (field2
               (fxarithmetic-shift-right
                 field0 (fx- width count)))
             (field (fxior field1 field2)))
        (fxcopy-bit-field n start end field))
      n))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fxreverse-bit-field} @vari{fx} @varii{fx} @variii{fx}
@varii{fx} and @variii{fx} must be non-negative and less than
@code{(fixnum-width)}.  Moreover, @varii{fx} must be less than or equal
to @variii{fx}.

The @code{fxreverse-bit-field} procedure returns the fixnum obtained
from @vari{fx} by reversing the order of the bits at positions from
@varii{fx} (inclusive) to @variii{fx} (exclusive).

@example
(fxreverse-bit-field #b1010010 1 4)       @result{}  88 ; #b1011000
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib arithmetics flonum
@subsection Flonums


This section describes the @rsixlibrary{arithmetic flonums} library.

This section uses @var{fl}, @vari{fl}, @varii{fl}, etc., as parameter
names for arguments that must be flonums, and @var{ifl} as a name for
arguments that must be integer--valued flonums, i.e., flonums for which
the @func{integer-valued?} predicate returns true.


@deffn Procedure {flonum?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a flonum, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {real->flonum} @var{x}
Return the best flonum representation of @var{x}.

The value returned is a flonum that is numerically closest to the
argument.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} If flonums are represented in binary floating point, then
implementations should break ties by preferring the floating--point
representation whose least significant bit is zero.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fl=?} @vari{fl} @varii{fl} @variii{fl} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fl<?} @vari{fl} @varii{fl} @variii{fl} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fl<=?} @vari{fl} @varii{fl} @variii{fl} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fl>?} @vari{fl} @varii{fl} @variii{fl} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fl>=?} @vari{fl} @varii{fl} @variii{fl} @dots{}
These procedures return @true{} if their arguments are (respectively):
equal, monotonically increasing, monotonically decreasing, monotonically
nondecreasing, or monotonically nonincreasing, @false{} otherwise.
These predicates must be transitive.

@example
(fl=? +inf.0 +inf.0)            @result{} #t
(fl=? -inf.0 +inf.0)            @result{} #f
(fl=? -inf.0 -inf.0)            @result{} #t
(fl=? 0.0 -0.0)                 @result{} #t
(fl<? 0.0 -0.0)                 @result{} #f
(fl=? +nan.0 fl)                @result{} #f
(fl<? +nan.0 fl)                @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {flinteger?} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flzero?} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flpositive?} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flnegative?} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flodd?} @var{ifl}
@deffnx Procedure {fleven?} @var{ifl}
@deffnx Procedure {flfinite?} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flinfinite?} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flnan?} @var{fl}
These numerical predicates test a flonum for a particular property,
returning @true{} or @false{}:

@table @func
@item flinteger?
procedure tests whether the number object is an integer,

@item flzero?
tests whether it is @func{fl=?} to zero,

@item flpositive?
tests whether it is greater than zero,

@item flnegative?
tests whether it is less than zero,

@item flodd?
tests whether it is odd,

@item fleven?
tests whether it is even,

@item flfinite?
tests whether it is not an infinity and not a NaN,

@item flinfinite?
tests whether it is an infinity,

@item flnan?
tests whether it is a NaN.
@end table

@example
(flnegative? -0.0)              @result{} #f
(flfinite?   +inf.0)            @result{} #f
(flfinite?   5.0)               @result{} #t
(flinfinite? 5.0)               @result{} #f
(flinfinite? +inf.0)            @result{} #t
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} @code{(flnegative? -0.0)} must return @false{}, else it
would lose the correspondence with @code{(fl< -0.0 0.0)}, which is
@false{} according to @ieee{} 754.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {flmax} @vari{fl} @varii{fl} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {flmin} @vari{fl} @varii{fl} @dots{}
These procedures return the maximum or minimum of their arguments.  They
always return a NaN when one or more of the arguments is a NaN.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fl+} @vari{fl} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fl*} @vari{fl} @dots{}
These procedures return the flonum sum or product of their flonum
arguments.  In general, they should return the flonum that best
approximates the mathematical sum or product.  (For implementations that
represent flonums using @ieee{} binary floating point, the meaning of
``best'' is defined by the @ieee{} standards.)

@example
(fl+ +inf.0 -inf.0)             @result{}  +nan.0
(fl+ +nan.0 @var{fl})           @result{}  +nan.0
(fl* +nan.0 @var{fl})           @result{}  +nan.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fl-} @vari{fl} @varii{fl} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fl-} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {fl/} @vari{fl} @varii{fl} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure {fl/} @var{fl}
With two or more arguments, these procedures return the flonum
difference or quotient of their flonum arguments, associating to the
left.

With one argument, however, they return the additive or multiplicative
flonum inverse of their argument.

In general, they should return the flonum that best approximates the
mathematical difference or quotient.  (For implementations that
represent flonums using @ieee{} binary floating point, the meaning of
``best'' is reasonably well--defined by the @ieee{} standards.)

@example
(fl- +inf.0 +inf.0)             @result{}  +nan.0
@end example

For undefined quotients, @func{fl/} behaves as specified by the @ieee{}
standards:

@example
(fl/ 1.0 0.0)                   @result{} +inf.0
(fl/ -1.0 0.0)                  @result{} -inf.0
(fl/ 0.0 0.0)                   @result{} +nan.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {flabs} @var{fl}
Return the absolute value of @var{fl}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fldiv-and-mod} @vari{fl} @varii{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {fldiv} @vari{fl} @varii{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flmod} @vari{fl} @varii{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {fldiv0-and-mod0} @vari{fl} @varii{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {fldiv0} @vari{fl} @varii{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flmod0} @vari{fl} @varii{fl}
These procedures implement number--theoretic integer division and return
the results of the corresponding mathematical operations specified in
report section @ref{baselib math semantics integer}.

In the cases where the mathematical requirements in @ref{baselib math
semantics} cannot be satisfied by any number object, either an exception
is raised with condition type @code{&implementation-restriction}, or
unspecified flonums (one for @func{fldiv}, @func{flmod}, @func{fldiv0}
and @func{flmod0}, two for @func{fldiv-and-mod} and
@func{fldiv0-and-mod0}) are returned.

@example
(fldiv @vari{fl} @varii{fl})         @result{} @vari{fl} div @varii{fl}
(flmod @vari{fl} @varii{fl})         @result{} @vari{fl} mod @varii{fl}
(fldiv-and-mod @vari{fl} @varii{fl}) @result{} @vari{fl} div @varii{fl}, @vari{fl} mod @varii{fl}
                                        ; two return values
(fldiv0 @vari{fl} @varii{fl})        @result{} @vari{fl} div_0 @varii{fl}
(flmod0 @vari{fl} @varii{fl})        @result{} @vari{fl} mod_0 @varii{fl}
(fldiv0-and-mod0 @vari{fl} @varii{fl})
@result{} @vari{fl} div_0 @varii{fl}, @vari{fl} mod_0 @varii{fl}
   ; two return values
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {flnumerator} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {fldenominator} @var{fl}
These procedures return the numerator or denominator of @var{fl} as a
flonum; the result is computed as if @var{fl} was represented as a
fraction in lowest terms.  The denominator is always positive.  The
denominator of @math{0.0} is defined to be @math{1.0}.

@example
(flnumerator +inf.0)           @result{} +inf.0
(flnumerator -inf.0)           @result{} -inf.0
(fldenominator +inf.0)         @result{} 1.0
(fldenominator -inf.0)         @result{} 1.0
(flnumerator 0.75)             @result{} 3.0 ; probably
(fldenominator 0.75)           @result{} 4.0 ; probably
@end example

Implementations should implement following behavior:

@example
(flnumerator -0.0)             @result{} -0.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {flfloor} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flceiling} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {fltruncate} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flround} @var{fl}
These procedures return integral flonums for flonum arguments that are
not infinities or NaNs.

@table @func
@item flfloor
Returns the largest integral flonum not larger than @var{fl}.

@item flceiling
Returns the smallest integral flonum not smaller than @var{fl}.

@item fltruncate
Returns the integral flonum closest to @var{fl} whose absolute value is
not larger than the absolute value of @var{fl}.

@item flround
Returns the closest integral flonum to @var{fl}, rounding to even when
@var{fl} represents a number halfway between two integers.
@end table

Although infinities and NaNs are not integer objects, these procedures
return an infinity when given an infinity as an argument, and a NaN when
given a NaN:

@example
(flfloor +inf.0)                @result{} +inf.0
(flceiling -inf.0)              @result{} -inf.0
(fltruncate +nan.0)             @result{} +nan.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {flexp} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {fllog} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {fllog} @vari{fl} @varii{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flsin} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flcos} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {fltan} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flasin} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flacos} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flatan} @var{fl}
@deffnx Procedure {flatan} @vari{fl} @varii{fl}
These procedures compute the usual transcendental functions.

@table @func
@item flexp
Computes the base-E exponential of @var{fl}.

@item fllog
With a single argument computes the natural logarithm of @var{fl} (not
the base ten logarithm); @code{(fllog @vari{fl} @varii{fl})} computes
the base--@varii{fl} logarithm of @vari{fl}.

@item flasin
@itemx flacos
@item flatan
Compute arcsine, arccosine, and arctangent, respectively.  @code{(flatan
@vari{fl} @varii{fl})} computes the arc tangent of @vari{fl}/@varii{fl}.
@end table

@ref{baselib math ops trascend} for the underlying mathematical
operations.  In the event that these operations do not yield a real
result for the given arguments, the result may be a NaN, or may be some
unspecified flonum.

Implementations that use @ieee{} binary floating--point arithmetic
should follow the relevant standards for these procedures.

@example
(flexp +inf.0)          @result{} +inf.0
(flexp -inf.0)          @result{} 0.0
(fllog +inf.0)          @result{} +inf.0
(fllog 0.0)             @result{} -inf.0
(fllog -0.0)            @result{} unspecified ; if -0.0 is distinguished
(fllog -inf.0)          @result{} +nan.0
(flatan -inf.0)         @result{} -1.5707963267948965  ; approximately
(flatan +inf.0)         @result{} 1.5707963267948965   ; approximately
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {flsqrt} @var{fl}
Returns the principal square root of @var{fl}.  For @math{-0.0},
@func{flsqrt} should return @math{-0.0}; for other negative arguments,
the result may be a NaN or some unspecified flonum.

@example
(flsqrt +inf.0)         @result{} +inf.0
(flsqrt -0.0)           @result{} -0.0
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {flexpt} @vari{fl} @varii{fl}
Either @vari{fl} should be non--negative, or, if @vari{fl} is negative,
@varii{fl} should be an integer object.

The @func{flexpt} procedure returns @vari{fl} raised to the power
@varii{fl}.  If @vari{fl} is negative and @varii{fl} is not an integer
object, the result may be a NaN, or may be some unspecified flonum.

If @vari{fl} and @varii{fl} are both zero, the result is @math{1.0}.  If
@vari{fl} is zero and @varii{fl} is positive, the result is zero.  If
@vari{fl} is negative, the result may be a NaN, or may be some
unspecified flonum.
@end deffn


@tindex &no-infinities
@deffn {Condition Type} {&no-infinities}
@deffnx Procedure {make-no-infinities-violation}
@deffnx Procedure {no-infinities-violation?} @var{obj}
@deffnx {Condition Type} {&no-nans}
@deffnx Procedure {make-no-nans-violation}
@deffnx Procedure {no-nans-violation?} @var{obj}
These condition types could be defined by the following code:

@example
(define-condition-type &no-infinities
    &implementation-restriction
  make-no-infinities-violation
  no-infinities-violation?)

(define-condition-type &no-nans
    &implementation-restriction
  make-no-nans-violation no-nans-violation?)
@end example

These types describe that a program has executed an arithmetic
operations that is specified to return an infinity or a NaN,
respectively, on a Scheme implementation that is not able to represent
the infinity or NaN.  @ref{baselib math infinities}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {fixnum->flonum} @var{fx}
Return a flonum that is numerically closest to @var{fx}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The result of this procedure may not be numerically equal
to @var{fx}, because the fixnum precision may be greater than the flonum
precision.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib arithmetics exact bitwise
@subsection Exact bitwise arithmetic


This section describes the @rsixlibrary{arithmetic bitwise} library.
The exact bitwise arithmetic provides generic operations on exact
integer objects.  This section uses @var{ei}, @vari{ei}, @varii{ei},
etc., as parameter names that must be exact integer objects.


@deffn Procedure bitwise-not @var{ei}
Returns the exact integer object whose two's complement representation
is the one's complement of the two's complement representation of
@var{ei}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-and @vari{ei} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure bitwise-ior @vari{ei} @dots{}
@deffnx Procedure bitwise-xor @vari{ei} @dots{}
These procedures return the exact integer object that is the bit--wise
``and'', ``inclusive or'', or ``exclusive or'' of the two's complement
representations of their arguments.  If they are passed only one
argument, they return that argument.  If they are passed no arguments,
they return the integer object (either @math{-1} or @math{0}) that acts
as identity for the operation.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-if @vari{ei} @varii{ei} @variii{ei}
Return the exact integer object that is the bit--wise ``if'' of the
two's complement representations of its arguments, i.e. for each bit, if
it is @math{1} in @vari{ei}, the corresponding bit in @varii{ei} becomes
the value of the corresponding bit in the result, and if it is @math{0},
the corresponding bit in @variii{ei} becomes the corresponding bit in
the value of the result.  This is the result of the following
computation:

@example
(bitwise-ior (bitwise-and @vari{ei} @varii{ei})
             (bitwise-and (bitwise-not @vari{ei}) @variii{ei}))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-bit-count @var{ei}
If @var{ei} is non--negative, this procedure returns the number of 1
bits in the two's complement representation of @var{ei}.  Otherwise it
returns the result of the following computation:

@example
(bitwise-not (bitwise-bit-count (bitwise-not @var{ei})))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-length @var{ei}
Return the number of bits needed to represent @var{ei} if it is
positive, and the number of bits needed to represent @code{(bitwise-not
@var{ei})} if it is negative, which is the exact integer object that is
the result of the following computation:

@example
(do ((result 0 (+ result 1))
     (bits (if (negative? @var{ei})
               (bitwise-not @var{ei})
               @var{ei})
           (bitwise-arithmetic-shift bits -1)))
    ((zero? bits)
     result))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-first-bit-set @var{ei}
Returns the index of the least significant @math{1} bit in the two's
complement representation of @var{ei}.  If @var{ei} is @math{0}, then
@math{-1} is returned.

@example
(bitwise-first-bit-set 0)        @result{} -1
(bitwise-first-bit-set 1)        @result{} 0
(bitwise-first-bit-set -4)       @result{} 2
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-bit-set? @vari{ei} @varii{ei}
@varii{ei} must be non--negative.

The @func{bitwise-bit-set?} procedure returns @true{} if the
@varii{ei}th bit is @math{1} in the two's complement representation of
@vari{ei}, and @false{} otherwise.  This is the result of the following
computation:

@example
(not (zero?
       (bitwise-and
         (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left 1 @varii{ei})
         @vari{ei})))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-copy-bit @vari{ei} @varii{ei} @variii{ei}
@varii{ei} must be non--negative, and @variii{ei} must be either
@math{0} or @math{1}.

The @func{bitwise-copy-bit} procedure returns the result of replacing
the @varii{ei}th bit of @vari{ei} by @variii{ei}, which is the result of
the following computation:

@example
(let* ((mask (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left 1 @varii{ei})))
  (bitwise-if mask
            (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left @variii{ei} @varii{ei})
            @vari{ei}))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-bit-field @vari{ei} @varii{ei} @variii{ei}
@varii{ei} and @variii{ei} must be non--negative, and @varii{ei} must be
less than or equal to @variii{ei}.

The @func{bitwise-bit-field} procedure returns the number represented by
the bits at the positions from @varii{ei} (inclusive) to @variii{ei}
(exclusive), which is the result of the following computation:

@example
(let ((mask
       (bitwise-not
        (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left -1 @variii{ei}))))
  (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-right
    (bitwise-and @vari{ei} mask)
    @varii{ei}))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-copy-bit-field @vari{ei} @varii{ei} @variii{ei} @variv{ei}
@varii{ei} and @variii{ei} must be non--negative, and @varii{ei} must be
less than or equal to @variii{ei}.

The @func{bitwise-copy-bit-field} procedure returns the result of
replacing in @vari{ei} the bits at positions from @varii{ei} (inclusive)
to @variii{ei} (exclusive) by the bits in @variv{ei} from position 0
(inclusive) to position @math{@variii{ei} - @varii{ei}} (exclusive)
which is the result of the following computation:

@example
(let* ((to    @vari{ei})
       (start @varii{ei})
       (end   @variii{ei})
       (from  @variv{ei})
       (mask1
         (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left -1 start))
       (mask2
         (bitwise-not
           (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left -1 end)))
       (mask (bitwise-and mask1 mask2)))
  (bitwise-if mask
              (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left from
                                             start)
              to))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-arithmetic-shift @vari{ei} @varii{ei}
Return the result of the following computation:

@example
(floor (* @vari{ei} (expt 2 @varii{ei})))
@end example

Examples:

@example
(bitwise-arithmetic-shift -6 -1)    @result{} -3
(bitwise-arithmetic-shift -5 -1)    @result{} -3
(bitwise-arithmetic-shift -4 -1)    @result{} -2
(bitwise-arithmetic-shift -3 -1)    @result{} -2
(bitwise-arithmetic-shift -2 -1)    @result{} -1
(bitwise-arithmetic-shift -1 -1)    @result{} -1
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left @vari{ei} @varii{ei}
@deffnx Procedure bitwise-arithmetic-shift-right @vari{ei} @varii{ei}
@varii{ei} must be non--negative.

The @func{bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left} procedure returns the same
result as @func{bitwise-arithmetic-shift}, and:

@example
(bitwise-arithmetic-shift-right @vari{ei} @varii{ei})
@end example

@noindent
returns the same result as:

@example
(bitwise-arithmetic-shift @vari{ei} (- @varii{ei}))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-rotate-bit-field @vari{ei} @varii{ei} @variii{ei} @variv{ei}
@varii{ei}, @variii{ei}, @variv{ei} must be non--negative, @varii{ei}
must be less than or equal to @variii{ei}, and @variv{ei} must be
non-negative.

The procedure returns the result of cyclically permuting in @vari{ei}
the bits at positions from @varii{ei} (inclusive) to @variii{ei}
(exclusive) by @variv{ei} bits towards the more significant bits, which
is the result of the following computation:

@example
(let* ((n     @vari{ei})
       (start @varii{ei})
       (end   @variii{ei})
       (count @variv{ei})
       (width (- end start)))
  (if (positive? width)
      (let* ((count (mod count width))
             (field0
               (bitwise-bit-field n start end))
             (field1 (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left
                       field0 count))
             (field2 (bitwise-arithmetic-shift-right
                       field0
                       (- width count)))
             (field (bitwise-ior field1 field2)))
        (bitwise-copy-bit-field n start end field))
      n))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure bitwise-reverse-bit-field @vari{ei} @varii{ei} @variii{ei}
@varii{ei} and @variii{ei} must be non--negative, and @varii{ei} must be
less than or equal to @variii{ei}.

The @func{bitwise-reverse-bit-field} procedure returns the result
obtained from @vari{ei} by reversing the order of the bits at positions
from @varii{ei} (inclusive) to @variii{ei} (exclusive).

@example
(bitwise-reverse-bit-field #b1010010 1 4)
@result{}  88 ; #b1011000
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case
@section Syntax--case


The @rsixlibrary{syntax-case} library provides support for writing
low--level macros in a high--level style, with automatic syntax
checking, input destructuring, output restructuring, maintenance of
lexical scoping and referential transparency (hygiene), and support for
controlled identifier capture.


@menu
* stdlib syntax-case hygiene::          Hygiene.
* stdlib syntax-case objects::          Syntax objects.
* stdlib syntax-case transformers::     Transformers.
* stdlib syntax-case parsing::          Parsing input and producing
                                        output.
* stdlib syntax-case identifier::       Identifier predicates.
* stdlib syntax-case conversion::       Syntax-object and datum
                                        conversions.
* stdlib syntax-case temporaries::      Generating lists of temporaries.
* stdlib syntax-case derived::          Derived forms and procedures.
* stdlib syntax-case violations::       Syntax violations.

Examples

* stdlib syntax-case define-macro::     Common Lisp style macros.
@end menu


@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case hygiene
@subsection Hygiene


Barendregt's @emph{hygiene condition} for the lambda calculus is an
informal notion that requires the free variables of an expression
@emph{N} that is to be substituted into another expression @emph{M} not
to be captured by bindings in @emph{M} when such capture is not
intended.

Kohlbecker, et al. propose a corresponding @emph{hygiene condition for
macro expansion} that applies in all situations where capturing is not
explicit: ``Generated identifiers that become binding instances in the
completely expanded program must only bind variables that are generated
at the same transcription step''.  In the terminology of this document,
the ``generated identifiers'' are those introduced by a transformer
rather than those present in the form passed to the transformer, and a
``macro transcription step'' corresponds to a single call by the
expander to a transformer.  Also, the hygiene condition applies to all
introduced bindings rather than to introduced variable bindings alone.

This leaves open what happens to an introduced identifier that appears
outside the scope of a binding introduced by the same call.  Such an
identifier refers to the lexical binding in effect where it appears
(within a @code{syntax} @hyper{template}) inside the transformer body or
one of the helpers it calls.  This is essentially the referential
transparency property described by Clinger and Rees.  Thus, the hygiene
condition can be restated as follows:

@quotation
A binding for an identifier introduced into the output of a transformer
call from the expander must capture only references to the identifier
introduced into the output of the same transformer call.

A reference to an identifier introduced into the output of a transformer
refers to the closest enclosing binding for the introduced identifier
or, if it appears outside of any enclosing binding for the introduced
identifier, the closest enclosing lexical binding where the identifier
appears (within a @code{syntax} @hyper{template}) inside the transformer
body or one of the helpers it calls.
@end quotation

Explicit captures are handled via @func{datum->syntax}.

Operationally, the expander can maintain hygiene with the help of
@emph{marks}.  Marks are applied selectively by the expander to the
output of each transformer it invokes, and substitutions are applied to
the portions of each binding form that are supposed to be within the
scope of the bound identifiers.  Marks are used to distinguish
like--named identifiers that are introduced at different times (either
present in the source or introduced into the output of a particular
transformer call), and substitutions are used to map identifiers to
their expand-time values.

Each time the expander encounters a macro use, it applies an
@emph{antimark} to the input form, invokes the associated transformer,
then applies a fresh mark to the output.  Marks and antimarks cancel, so
the portions of the input that appear in the output are effectively left
unmarked, while the portions of the output that are introduced are
marked with the fresh mark.

Each time the expander encounters a binding form it creates a set of
substitutions, each mapping one of the (possibly marked) bound
identifiers to information about the binding.  (For a @func{lambda}
expression, the expander might map each bound identifier to a
representation of the formal parameter in the output of the expander.
For a @func{let-syntax} form, the expander might map each bound
identifier to the associated transformer.)  These substitutions are
applied to the portions of the input form in which the binding is
supposed to be visible.

Marks and substitutions together form a @emph{wrap} that is layered on
the form being processed by the expander and pushed down toward the
leaves as necessary.  A wrapped form is referred to as a @emph{wrapped
syntax object}.  Ultimately, the wrap may rest on a leaf that represents
an identifier, in which case the wrapped syntax object is also referred
to as an @emph{identifier}.  An identifier contains a name along with
the wrap.  (Names are typically represented by symbols.)

When a substitution is created to map an identifier to an expand--time
value, the substitution records the name of the identifier and the set
of marks that have been applied to that identifier, along with the
associated expand--time value.  The expander resolves identifier
references by looking for the latest matching substitution to be applied
to the identifier, i.e., the outermost substitution in the wrap whose
name and marks match the name and marks recorded in the substitution.
The name matches if it is the same name (if using symbols, then by
@func{eq?}), and the marks match if the marks recorded with the
substitution are the same as those that appear @emph{below} the
substitution in the wrap, i.e., those that were applied @emph{before}
the substitution.  Marks applied after a substitution, i.e., appear over
the substitution in the wrap, are not relevant and are ignored.

An algebra that defines how marks and substitutions work more precisely
is given in section 2.4 of Oscar Waddell's PhD thesis.


@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case objects
@subsection Syntax objects


A @emph{syntax object} is a representation of a Scheme form that
contains contextual information about the form in addition to its
structure.  This contextual information is used by the expander to
maintain lexical scoping and may also be used by an implementation to
maintain source--object correlation.

A syntax object may be wrapped.  It may also be unwrapped, fully or
partially, i.e., consist of list and vector structure with wrapped
syntax objects or nonsymbol values at the leaves.  More formally, a
syntax object is:

@itemize
@item
a pair of syntax objects,

@item
a vector of syntax objects,

@item
a nonpair, nonvector, nonsymbol value, or

@item
a wrapped syntax object.
@end itemize

The distinction between the terms ``syntax object'' and ``wrapped syntax
object'' is important.  For example, when invoked by the expander, a
transformer must accept a wrapped syntax object but may return any
syntax object, including an unwrapped syntax object.

Syntax objects representing identifiers are always wrapped and are
distinct from other types of values.  Wrapped syntax objects that are
not identifiers may or may not be distinct from other types of values.

@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case transformers
@subsection Transformers


In @func{define-syntax}, @func{let-syntax}, and @func{letrec-syntax}
forms, a binding for a syntactic keyword is an expression that evaluates
to a @emph{transformer}.

A transformer is a @emph{transformation procedure} or a @emph{variable
transformer}.  A transformation procedure is a procedure that must
accept one argument, a wrapped syntax object representing the input, and
return a syntax object representing the output.  The transformer is
called by the expander whenever a reference to a keyword with which it
has been associated is found.  If the keyword appears in the car of a
list--structured input form, the transformer receives the entire
list--structured form, and its output replaces the entire form.  Except
with variable transformers (see below), if the keyword is found in any
other definition or expression context, the transformer receives a
wrapped syntax object representing just the keyword reference, and its
output replaces just the reference.  Except with variable transformers,
an exception with condition type @code{&syntax} is raised if the keyword
appears on the left--hand side of a @func{set!} expression.


@deffn Procedure make-variable-transformer @var{proc}
@var{proc} should accept one argument, a wrapped syntax object, and
return a syntax object.

The @func{make-variable-transformer} procedure creates a @emph{variable
transformer}.  A variable transformer is like an ordinary transformer
except that, if a keyword associated with a variable transformer appears
on the left--hand side of a @func{set!} expression, an exception is not
raised.  Instead, @var{proc} is called with a wrapped syntax object
representing the entire @func{set!} expression as its argument, and its
return value replaces the entire @func{set!}  expression.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{proc} only to the extent performed by applying
it as described.  An implementation may check whether @var{proc} is an
appropriate argument before applying it.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case parsing
@subsection Parsing input and producing output


Transformers can destructure their input with @func{syntax-case} and
rebuild their output with @code{syntax}.


@deffn Syntax syntax-case @hyper{expression} (@hyper{literal} @dots{}) @hyper{syntax-case clause} @dots{}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} _
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} {...}
Each @hyper{literal} must be an identifier.  Each @hyper{syntax-case
clause} must take one of the following two forms.

@example
(@hyper{pattern} @hyper{output expression})
(@hyper{pattern} @hyper{fender} @hyper{output expression})
@end example

@hyper{fender} and @hyper{output expression} must be
@hyper{expression}s.

A @hyper{pattern} is an identifier, constant, or one of the following.

@example
(@hyper{pattern} @dots{})
(@hyper{pattern} @hyper{pattern} @dots{} . @hyper{pattern})
(@hyper{pattern} @dots{} @hyper{pattern} @hyper{ellipsis} @hyper{pattern} @dots{})
(@hyper{pattern} @dots{} @hyper{pattern} @hyper{ellipsis} @hyper{pattern} @dots{} . @hyper{pattern})
#(@hyper{pattern} @dots{})
#(@hyper{pattern} @dots{} @hyper{pattern} @hyper{ellipsis} @hyper{pattern} @dots{})
@end example

An @hyper{ellipsis} is the identifier ``@code{...}'' (three periods).

An identifier appearing within a @hyper{pattern} may be an underscore
@code{_}, a literal identifier listed in the list of literals
@code{(@hyper{literal} @dots{})}, or an ellipsis @code{...}.  All other
identifiers appearing within a @hyper{pattern} are @emph{pattern
variables}.  It is a syntax violation if an ellipsis or underscore
appears in @code{(@hyper{literal} @dots{})}.

@code{_} and @code{...} are the same as in the @rsixlibrary{base}
library.

Pattern variables match arbitrary input subforms and are used to refer
to elements of the input.  It is a syntax violation if the same pattern
variable appears more than once in a @hyper{pattern}.

Underscores also match arbitrary input subforms but are not pattern
variables and so cannot be used to refer to those elements.  Multiple
underscores may appear in a @hyper{pattern}.

A literal identifier matches an input subform if and only if the input
subform is an identifier and either both its occurrence in the input
expression and its occurrence in the list of literals have the same
lexical binding, or the two identifiers have the same name and both have
no lexical binding.

A subpattern followed by an ellipsis can match zero or more elements of
the input.

More formally, an input form @emph{F} matches a pattern @emph{P} if and
only if one of the following holds:

@itemize
@item
@emph{P} is an underscore (@code{_}).

@item
@emph{P} is a pattern variable.

@item
@emph{P} is a literal identifier and @emph{F} is an equivalent
identifier in the sense of @func{free-identifier=?}.

@item
@emph{P} is of the form:

@example
(P_1 ... P_n)
@end example

@noindent
and @emph{F} is a list of @emph{n} elements that match @emph{P_1}
through @emph{P_n}.

@item
@emph{P} is of the form:

@example
(P_1 ... P_n . P_x)
@end example

@noindent
and @emph{F} is a list or improper list of @emph{n} or more elements
whose first @emph{n} elements match @emph{P_1} through @emph{P_n} and
whose @emph{n}th cdr matches @emph{P_x}.

@item
@emph{P} is of the form:

@example
(P_1 ... P_k P_e @hyper{ellipsis} P_(m+1) ... P_n)
@end example

@noindent
where @hyper{ellipsis} is the identifier @code{...}  and @emph{F} is a
proper list of @emph{n} elements whose first @emph{k} elements match
@emph{P_1} through @emph{P_k}, whose next @emph{m-k} elements each match
@emph{P_e}, and whose remaining @emph{n-m} elements match @emph{P_(m+1)}
through @emph{P_n}.

@item
@emph{P} is of the form:

@example
(P_1 ... P_k P_e @hyper{ellipsis} P_(m+1) ... P_n . P_x)
@end example

@noindent
where @hyper{ellipsis} is the identifier @code{...}  and @emph{F} is a
list or improper list of @emph{n} elements whose first @emph{k} elements
match @emph{P_1} through @emph{P_k}, whose next @emph{m-k} elements each
match @emph{P_e}, whose next @emph{n-m} elements match @emph{P_(m+1)}
through @emph{P_n}, and whose @emph{n}th and final cdr matches
@emph{P_x}.

@item
@emph{P} is of the form:

@example
#(P_1 ... P_n)
@end example

@noindent
and @emph{F} is a vector of @emph{n} elements that match @emph{P_1}
through @emph{P_n}.

@item
@emph{P} is of the form:

@example
#(P_1 ... P_k P_e @hyper{ellipsis} P_(m+1) ... P_n)
@end example

@noindent
where @hyper{ellipsis} is the identifier @code{...}  and @emph{F} is a
vector of @emph{n} or more elements whose first @emph{k} elements match
@emph{P_1} through @emph{P_k}, whose next @emph{m-k} elements each match
@emph{P_e}, and whose remaining @emph{n-m} elements match @emph{P_(m+1)}
through @emph{P_n}.

@item
@emph{P} is a pattern datum (any nonlist, nonvector, nonsymbol datum)
and @emph{F} is equal to @emph{P} in the sense of the @func{equal?}
procedure.
@end itemize

A @func{syntax-case} expression first evaluates @hyper{expression}.  It
then attempts to match the @hyper{pattern} from the first
@hyper{syntax-case clause} against the resulting value, which is
unwrapped as necessary to perform the match.  If the pattern matches the
value and no @hyper{fender} is present, @hyper{output expression} is
evaluated and its value returned as the value of the @func{syntax-case}
expression.  If the pattern does not match the value, @func{syntax-case}
tries the second @hyper{syntax-case clause}, then the third, and so on.
It is a syntax violation if the value does not match any of the
patterns.

If the optional @hyper{fender} is present, it serves as an additional
constraint on acceptance of a clause.  If the @hyper{pattern} of a given
@hyper{syntax-case clause} matches the input value, the corresponding
@hyper{fender} is evaluated.  If @hyper{fender} evaluates to a true
value, the clause is accepted; otherwise, the clause is rejected as if
the pattern had failed to match the value.  Fenders are logically a part
of the matching process, i.e., they specify additional matching
constraints beyond the basic structure of the input.

Pattern variables contained within a clause's @hyper{pattern} are bound
to the corresponding pieces of the input value within the clause's
@hyper{fender} (if present) and @hyper{output expression}.  Pattern
variables can be referenced only within @code{syntax} expressions (see
below).  Pattern variables occupy the same name space as program
variables and keywords.

If the @func{syntax-case} form is in tail context, the @hyper{output
expression}s are also in tail position.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax syntax @hyper{template}
A @func{syntax} expression is similar to a @func{quote} expression
except that:

@enumerate
@item
the values of pattern variables appearing within @hyper{template} are
inserted into @hyper{template},

@item
contextual information associated both with the input and with the
template is retained in the output to support lexical scoping, and

@item
the value of a @func{syntax} expression is a syntax object.
@end enumerate

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The following sharp--quote expression:

@example
#'@hyper{template}
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to:

@example
(syntax @hyper{template})
@end example

@noindent
@ref{lang lex datum abbreviations} for the other abbreviations.
@end quotation

A @hyper{template} can be one among: a pattern variable, an identifier
that is not a pattern variable, a pattern datum, or one of the
following.

@example
(@hyper{subtemplate} @dots{})
(@hyper{subtemplate} @dots{} . @hyper{template})
#(@hyper{subtemplate} @dots{})
@end example

A @hyper{subtemplate} is a @hyper{template} followed by zero or more
ellipses.

The value of a @code{syntax} form is a copy of @hyper{template} in which
the pattern variables appearing within the template are replaced with
the input subforms to which they are bound:

@itemize
@item
pattern data and identifiers that are not pattern variables or ellipses
are copied directly into the output;

@item
a subtemplate followed by an ellipsis expands into zero or more
occurrences of the subtemplate;

@item
pattern variables that occur in subpatterns followed by one or more
ellipses may occur only in subtemplates that are followed by (at least)
as many ellipses:

@itemize -
@item
these pattern variables are replaced in the output by the input subforms
to which they are bound, distributed as specified;

@item
if a pattern variable is followed by more ellipses in the subtemplate
than in the associated subpattern, the input form is replicated as
necessary;

@item
the subtemplate must contain at least one pattern variable from a
subpattern followed by an ellipsis, and for at least one such pattern
variable, the subtemplate must be followed by exactly as many ellipses
as the subpattern in which the pattern variable appears (otherwise, the
expander would not be able to determine how many times the subform
should be repeated in the output);
@end itemize
@end itemize

@noindent
it is a syntax violation if the above constraints are not met.

A template of the form @code{(@hyper{ellipsis} @hyper{template})} is
identical to @hyper{template}, except that ellipses within the template
have no special meaning.  That is, any ellipses contained within
@hyper{template} are treated as ordinary identifiers.  In particular,
the template @code{(... ...)} produces a single ellipsis.  This allows
macro uses to expand into forms containing ellipses.

The output produced by @func{syntax} is wrapped or unwrapped according
to the following rules.

@itemize
@item
the copy of @code{(@hyperi{t} .  @hyperii{t})} is a pair if @hyperi{t}
or @hyperii{t} contain any pattern variables,

@item
the copy of @code{(@hyper{t} @hyper{ellipsis})} is a list if @hyper{t}
contains any pattern variables,

@item
the copy of @code{#(@hyperi{t} ... @hypern{t})} is a vector if any of
@hyperi{t}, @dots{}, @hypern{t} contain any pattern variables,

@item
the copy of any portion of @hyper{t} not containing any pattern
variables is a wrapped syntax object.
@end itemize

The input subforms inserted in place of the pattern variables are
wrapped if and only if the corresponding input subforms are wrapped.
@end deffn


The following definitions of @func{or} illustrate @func{syntax-case} and
@func{syntax}.  The second is equivalent to the first but uses the
@code{#'} prefix instead of the full @func{syntax} form.

@example
(define-syntax or
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      [(_) (syntax #f)]
      [(_ e) (syntax e)]
      [(_ e1 e2 e3 ...)
       (syntax (let ([t e1])
                 (if t t (or e2 e3 ...))))])))

(define-syntax or
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      [(_) #'#f]
      [(_ e) #'e]
      [(_ e1 e2 e3 ...)
       #'(let ([t e1])
           (if t t (or e2 e3 ...)))])))
@end example

The examples below define @emph{identifier macros}, macro uses
supporting keyword references that do not necessarily appear in the
first position of a list--structured form.  The second example uses
@func{make-variable-transformer} to handle the case where the keyword
appears on the left-hand side of a @func{set!}  expression.

@example
(define p (cons 4 5))
(define-syntax p.car
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      [(_ . rest) #'((car p) . rest)]
      [_  #'(car p)])))

p.car                   @result{} 4
(set! p.car 15)         @result{} exception &syntax

(define p (cons 4 5))
(define-syntax p.car
  (make-variable-transformer
    (lambda (x)
      (syntax-case x (set!)
        [(set! _ e) #'(set-car! p e)]
        [(_ . rest) #'((car p) . rest)]
        [_  #'(car p)]))))
(set! p.car 15)

p.car                   @result{} 15
p                       @result{} (15 . 5)
@end example

@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case identifier
@subsection Identifier predicates


@deffn Procedure {identifier?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is an identifier, i.e., a syntax object
representing an identifier, and @false{} otherwise.

The @func{identifier?} procedure is often used within a fender to verify
that certain subforms of an input form are identifiers, as in the
definition of @code{rec}, which creates self--contained recursive
objects, below.

@example
(define-syntax rec
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((_ x e)
       (identifier? #'x)
       #'(letrec ((x e)) x)))))

(map (rec fact
       (lambda (n)
         (if (= n 0)
             1
             (* n (fact (- n 1))))))
     '(1 2 3 4 5))    @result{} (1 2 6 24 120)

(rec 5 (lambda (x) x)) @result{} exception &syntax
@end example
@end deffn


The procedures @func{bound-identifier=?} and @func{free-identifier=?}
each take two identifier arguments and return @true{} if their arguments
are equivalent and @false{} otherwise.  These predicates are used to
compare identifiers according to their @emph{intended use} as free
references or bound identifiers in a given context.


@deffn Procedure {bound-identifier=?} @vari{id} @varii{id}
@vari{id} and @varii{id} must be identifiers.

The procedure @func{bound-identifier=?} returns @true{} if a binding for
one would capture a reference to the other in the output of the
transformer, assuming that the reference appears within the scope of the
binding, and @false{} otherwise.

In general, two identifiers are @func{bound-identifier=?} only if both
are present in the original program or both are introduced by the same
transformer application (perhaps implicitly, see @func{datum->syntax}).

Operationally, two identifiers are considered equivalent by
@func{bound-identifier=?} if and only if they have the same name and
same marks.

The @func{bound-identifier=?} procedure can be used for detecting
duplicate identifiers in a binding construct or for other preprocessing
of a binding construct that requires detecting instances of the bound
identifiers.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {free-identifier=?} @vari{id} @varii{id}
@vari{id} and @varii{id} must be identifiers.

The @func{free-identifier=?} procedure returns @true{} if and only if
the two identifiers would resolve to the same binding if both were to
appear in the output of a transformer outside of any bindings inserted
by the transformer.  (If neither of two like--named identifiers resolves
to a binding, i.e., both are unbound, they are considered to resolve to
the same binding.)

Operationally, two identifiers are considered equivalent by
@func{free-identifier=?} if and only the topmost matching substitution
for each maps to the same binding or the identifiers have the same name
and no matching substitution.

The @func{syntax-case} and @func{syntax-rules} forms internally use
@func{free-identifier=?} to compare identifiers listed in the literals
list against input identifiers.

@example
(let ((fred 17))
  (define-syntax a
    (lambda (x)
      (syntax-case x ()
        ((_ id) #'(b id fred)))))
  (define-syntax b
    (lambda (x)
      (syntax-case x ()
        ((_ id1 id2)
         #`(list
             #,(free-identifier=? #'id1 #'id2)
             #,(bound-identifier=? #'id1 #'id2))))))
  (a fred))
@result{} (#t #f)
@end example

The following definition of unnamed @func{let} uses
@func{bound-identifier=?} to detect duplicate identifiers.

@example
(define-syntax let
  (lambda (x)
    (define unique-ids?
      (lambda (ls)
        (or (null? ls)
            (and (let notmem?
                        ((x (car ls)) (ls (cdr ls)))
                   (or (null? ls)
                       (and (not (bound-identifier=?
                                   x (car ls)))
                            (notmem? x (cdr ls)))))
                 (unique-ids? (cdr ls))))))
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((_ ((i v) ...) e1 e2 ...)
       (unique-ids? #'(i ...))
       #'((lambda (i ...) e1 e2 ...) v ...)))))
@end example

The argument @code{#'(i ...)} to @func{unique-ids?} is guaranteed to be
a list by the rules given in the description of @func{syntax} above.

With this definition of @func{let}:

@example
(let ((a 3) (a 4)) (+ a a))    @result{} exception &syntax
@end example

However,

@example
(let-syntax
  ((dolet (lambda (x)
            (syntax-case x ()
              ((_ b)
               #'(let ((a 3) (b 4)) (+ a b)))))))
  (dolet a))
@result{} 7
@end example

@noindent
since the identifier @code{a} introduced by @func{dolet} and the
identifier @code{a} extracted from the input form are not
@func{bound-identifier=?}.

Rather than including @code{else} in the literals list as before, this
version of @func{case} explicitly tests for @code{else} using
@func{free-identifier=?}.

@example
(define-syntax case
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((_ e0 ((k ...) e1 e2 ...) ...
              (else-key else-e1 else-e2 ...))
       (and (identifier? #'else-key)
            (free-identifier=? #'else-key #'else))
       #'(let ((t e0))
           (cond
             ((memv t '(k ...)) e1 e2 ...)
             ...
             (else else-e1 else-e2 ...))))
      ((_ e0 ((ka ...) e1a e2a ...)
              ((kb ...) e1b e2b ...) ...)
       #'(let ((t e0))
           (cond
             ((memv t '(ka ...)) e1a e2a ...)
             ((memv t '(kb ...)) e1b e2b ...)
             ...))))))
@end example

With either definition of @func{case}, @code{else} is not recognized as
an auxiliary keyword if an enclosing lexical binding for @code{else}
exists.  For example,

@example
(let ((else @false{}))
  (case 0 (else (write "oops"))))    @result{} exception &syntax
@end example

@noindent
since @code{else} is bound lexically and is therefore not the same
@code{else} that appears in the definition of @func{case}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case conversion
@subsection Syntax--object and datum conversions


@deffn Procedure {syntax->datum} @var{syntax-object}
Strip all syntactic information from a syntax object and returns the
corresponding Scheme datum.

Identifiers stripped in this manner are converted to their symbolic
names, which can then be compared with @func{eq?}.  Thus, a predicate
@code{symbolic-identifier=?} might be defined as follows.

@example
(define symbolic-identifier=?
  (lambda (x y)
    (eq? (syntax->datum x)
         (syntax->datum y))))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {datum->syntax} @var{template-id} @var{datum}
@var{template-id} must be a template identifier and @var{datum} should
be a datum value.

The @func{datum->syntax} procedure returns a syntax-object
representation of @var{datum} that contains the same contextual
information as @var{template-id}, with the effect that the syntax object
behaves as if it were introduced into the code when @var{template-id}
was introduced.

The @func{datum->syntax} procedure allows a transformer to ``bend''
lexical scoping rules by creating @emph{implicit identifiers} that
behave as if they were present in the input form, thus permitting the
definition of macros that introduce visible bindings for or references
to identifiers that do not appear explicitly in the input form.  For
example, the following defines a @func{loop} expression that uses this
controlled form of identifier capture to bind the variable @code{break}
to an escape procedure within the loop body.  (The derived
@func{with-syntax} form is like @func{let} but binds pattern variables.)

@example
(define-syntax loop
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((k e ...)
       (with-syntax
           ((break (datum->syntax #'k 'break)))
         #'(call-with-current-continuation
             (lambda (break)
               (let f () e ... (f)))))))))

(let ((n 3) (ls '()))
  (loop
    (if (= n 0) (break ls))
    (set! ls (cons 'a ls))
    (set! n (- n 1))))
=> (a a a)
@end example

Were @code{loop} to be defined as:

@example
(define-syntax loop
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((_ e ...)
       #'(call-with-current-continuation
           (lambda (break)
             (let f () e ... (f))))))))
@end example

@noindent
the variable @code{break} would not be visible in @code{e ...}.

The datum argument @var{datum} may also represent an arbitrary Scheme
form, as demonstrated by the following definition of @func{include}.

@example
(define-syntax include
  (lambda (x)
    (define read-file
      (lambda (fn k)
        (let ((p (open-file-input-port fn)))
          (let f ((x (get-datum p)))
            (if (eof-object? x)
                (begin (close-port p) '())
                (cons (datum->syntax k x)
                      (f (get-datum p))))))))
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((k filename)
       (let ((fn (syntax->datum #'filename)))
         (with-syntax (((exp ...)
                        (read-file fn #'k)))
           #'(begin exp ...)))))))
@end example

@code{(include "filename")} expands into a @func{begin} expression
containing the forms found in the file named by @code{"filename"}.  For
example, if the file @file{flib.ss} contains:

@example
(define f (lambda (x) (g (* x x))))
@end example

@noindent
and the file @file{glib.ss} contains:

@example
(define g (lambda (x) (+ x x)))
@end example

@noindent
the expression:

@example
(let ()
  (include "flib.ss")
  (include "glib.ss")
  (f 5))
@end example

@noindent
evaluates to @math{50}.

The definition of @func{include} uses @func{datum->syntax} to convert
the objects read from the file into syntax objects in the proper lexical
context, so that identifier references and definitions within those
expressions are scoped where the @func{include} form appears.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case temporaries
@subsection Generating lists of temporaries


Transformers can introduce a fixed number of identifiers into their
output simply by naming each identifier.  In some cases, however, the
number of identifiers to be introduced depends upon some characteristic
of the input expression.  A straightforward definition of @func{letrec},
for example, requires as many temporary identifiers as there are binding
pairs in the input expression.  The procedure
@func{generate-temporaries} is used to construct lists of temporary
identifiers.


@deffn Procedure generate-temporaries @var{l}
@var{l} must be be a list or syntax object representing a
list--structured form; its contents are not important.

The number of temporaries generated is the number of elements in
@var{l}.  Each temporary is guaranteed to be unique, i.e., different
from all other identifiers.

A definition of @func{letrec} equivalent to the one using
@func{syntax-rules} given in @ref{lang derived} is shown below.

@example
(define-syntax letrec
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((_ ((i e) ...) b1 b2 ...)
       (with-syntax
           (((t ...) (generate-temporaries #'(i ...))))
         #'(let ((i <undefined>) ...)
             (let ((t e) ...)
               (set! i t) ...
               (let () b1 b2 ...))))))))
@end example

This version uses @func{generate-temporaries} instead of recursively
defined helper to generate the necessary temporaries.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case derived
@subsection Derived forms and procedures


The forms and procedures described in this section can be defined in
terms of the forms and procedures described in earlier sections of this
chapter.


@deffn Syntax with-syntax ((@hyper{pattern} @hyper{expression}) @dots{}) @hyper{body}
The @func{with-syntax} form is used to bind pattern variables, just as
@func{let} is used to bind variables.  This allows a transformer to
construct its output in separate pieces, then put the pieces together.

Each @hyper{pattern} is identical in form to a @func{syntax-case}
pattern.  The value of each @hyper{expression} is computed and
destructured according to the corresponding @hyper{pattern}, and pattern
variables within the @hyper{pattern} are bound as with
@func{syntax-case} to the corresponding portions of the value within
@hyper{body}.

The @func{with-syntax} form may be defined in terms of
@func{syntax-case} as follows.

@example
(define-syntax with-syntax
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((_ ((p e0) ...) e1 e2 ...)
       (syntax (syntax-case (list e0 ...) ()
                 ((p ...) (let () e1 e2 ...))))))))
@end example

The following definition of @func{cond} demonstrates the use of
@func{with-syntax} to support transformers that employ recursion
internally to construct their output.  It handles all @func{cond} clause
variations and takes care to produce one-armed @func{if} expressions
where appropriate.

@example
(define-syntax cond
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((_ c1 c2 ...)
       (let f ((c1 #'c1) (c2* #'(c2 ...)))
         (syntax-case c2* ()
           (()
            (syntax-case c1 (else =>)
              ((else e1 e2 ...) #'(begin e1 e2 ...))
              ((e0) #'e0)
              ((e0 => e1)
               #'(let ((t e0)) (if t (e1 t))))
              ((e0 e1 e2 ...)
               #'(if e0 (begin e1 e2 ...)))))
           ((c2 c3 ...)
            (with-syntax ((rest (f #'c2 #'(c3 ...))))
              (syntax-case c1 (=>)
                ((e0) #'(let ((t e0)) (if t t rest)))
                ((e0 => e1)
                 #'(let ((t e0)) (if t (e1 t) rest)))
                ((e0 e1 e2 ...)
                 #'(if e0
                        (begin e1 e2 ...)
                        rest)))))))))))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax quasisyntax @hyper{template}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} unsyntax
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} unsyntax-splicing
The @func{quasisyntax} form is similar to @func{syntax}, but it allows
parts of the quoted text to be evaluated, in a manner similar to the
operation of @func{quasiquote} (@ref{baselib quasiquotation}).

Within a @func{quasisyntax} @var{template}, subforms of @func{unsyntax}
and @func{unsyntax-splicing} forms are evaluated, and everything else is
treated as ordinary template material, as with @func{syntax}.

The value of each @func{unsyntax} subform is inserted into the output in
place of the @func{unsyntax} form, while the value of each
@func{unsyntax-splicing} subform is spliced into the surrounding list or
vector structure.  Uses of @func{unsyntax} and @func{unsyntax-splicing}
are valid only within @func{quasisyntax} expressions.

A @func{quasisyntax} expression may be nested, with each
@func{quasisyntax} introducing a new level of syntax quotation and each
@func{unsyntax} or @func{unsyntax-splicing} taking away a level of
quotation.  An expression nested within @emph{n} @func{quasisyntax}
expressions must be within @emph{n} @emph{unsyntax} or
@func{unsyntax-splicing} expressions to be evaluated.

As noted in @ref{lang lex datum abbreviations},
@code{#`@hyper{template}} is equivalent to @code{(quasisyntax
@hyper{template})}, @code{#,@hyper{template}} is equivalent to
@code{(unsyntax @hyper{template})}, and @code{#,@@@hyper{template}} is
equivalent to @code{(unsyntax-splicing @hyper{template})}.

The @func{quasisyntax} keyword can be used in place of
@func{with-syntax} in many cases.  For example, the definition of
@func{case} shown under the description of @func{with-syntax} above can
be rewritten using @func{quasisyntax} as follows.

@example
(define-syntax case
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((_ e c1 c2 ...)
       #`(let ((t e))
           #,(let f ((c1 #'c1) (cmore #'(c2 ...)))
               (if (null? cmore)
                   (syntax-case c1 (else)
                     ((else e1 e2 ...)
                      #'(begin e1 e2 ...))
                     (((k ...) e1 e2 ...)
                      #'(if (memv t '(k ...))
                            (begin e1 e2 ...))))
                   (syntax-case c1 ()
                     (((k ...) e1 e2 ...)
                      #`(if (memv t '(k ...))
                            (begin e1 e2 ...)
                            #,(f (car cmore)
                                  (cdr cmore))))))))))))
@end example

Uses of @func{unsyntax} and @func{unsyntax-splicing} with zero or more
than one subform are valid only in splicing (list or vector) contexts.
@code{(unsyntax @var{template} @dots{})} is equivalent to
@code{(unsyntax @var{template}) ...}, and @code{(unsyntax-splicing
@var{template} ...)} is equivalent to @code{(unsyntax-splicing
@var{template}) ...}.  These forms are primarily useful as intermediate
forms in the output of the @func{quasisyntax} expander.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Uses of @func{unsyntax} and @func{unsyntax-splicing} with
zero or more than one subform enable certain idioms, such as
@code{#,@@#,@@}, which has the effect of a doubly indirect splicing when
used within a doubly nested and doubly evaluated @func{quasisyntax}
expression, as with the nested @func{quasiquote} examples shown in
section @ref{baselib quasiquotation}.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Any @func{syntax-rules} form can be expressed with
@func{syntax-case} by making the @func{lambda} expression and
@func{syntax} expressions explicit, and @func{syntax-rules} may be
defined in terms of @func{syntax-case} as follows.

@example
(define-syntax syntax-rules
  (lambda (x)
    (syntax-case x ()
      ((_ (lit ...) ((k . p) t) ...)
       (for-all identifier? #'(lit ... k ...))
       #'(lambda (x)
           (syntax-case x (lit ...)
             ((_ . p) #'t) ...))))))
@end example
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The @func{identifier-syntax} form of the base library
(@ref{baselib transformers}) may be defined in terms of
@func{syntax-case}, @func{syntax}, and @func{make-variable-transformer}
as follows.

@example
(define-syntax identifier-syntax
  (syntax-rules (set!)
    ((_ e)
     (lambda (x)
       (syntax-case x ()
         (id (identifier? #'id) #'e)
         ((_ x (... ...)) #'(e x (... ...))))))
    ((_ (id exp1) ((set! var val) exp2))
     (and (identifier? #'id) (identifier? #'var))
     (make-variable-transformer
       (lambda (x)
         (syntax-case x (set!)
           ((set! var val) #'exp2)
           ((id x (... ...)) #'(exp1 x (... ...)))
           (id (identifier? #'id) #'exp1)))))))
@end example
@end quotation

@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case violations
@subsection Syntax violations


@deffn Procedure syntax-violation @var{who message form}
@deffnx Procedure syntax-violation @var{who message form subform}
@var{who} must be @false{} or a string or a symbol.  @var{message} must
be a string.  @var{form} must be a syntax object or a datum value.
@var{subform} must be a syntax object or a datum value.

The @func{syntax-violation} procedure raises an exception, reporting a
syntax violation.  @var{who} should describe the macro transformer that
detected the exception.  The @var{message} argument should describe the
violation.  @var{form} should be the erroneous source syntax object or a
datum value representing a form. The optional @var{subform} argument
should be a syntax object or datum value representing a form that more
precisely locates the violation.

If @var{who} is @false{}, @func{syntax-violation} attempts to infer an
appropriate value for the condition object (see below) as follows: When
@var{form} is either an identifier or a list-structured syntax object
containing an identifier as its first element, then the inferred value
is the identifier's symbol.  Otherwise, no value for @var{who} is
provided as part of the condition object.

The condition object provided with the exception has the following
condition types:

@itemize
@item
If @var{who} is not @false{} or can be inferred, the condition has
condition type @code{&who}, with @var{who} as the value of its field.
In that case, @var{who} should identify the procedure or entity that
detected the exception.  If it is @false{}, the condition does not have
condition type @code{&who}.

@item
The condition has condition type @code{&message}, with @var{message} as
the value of its field.

@item
The condition has condition type @code{&syntax} with @var{form} and
@var{subform} as the value of its fields.  If @var{subform} is not
provided, the value of the subform field is @false{}.
@end itemize
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib syntax-case define-macro
@subsection Common Lisp style macros


@findex lisp-transformer
@findex define-macro
@cindex Common Lisp style macros


Using @func{datum->syntax}, it is even possible to break hygiene
entirely and write macros in the style of old Lisp macros.  The
@func{lisp-transformer} procedure defined below creates a transformer
that converts its input into a datum, calls the programmer's procedure
on this datum, and converts the result back into a syntax object scoped
where the original macro use appeared.

@example
(define lisp-transformer
  (lambda (p)
    (lambda (x)
      (syntax-case x ()
        [(kwd . rest)
         (datum->syntax #'kwd
           (p (syntax->datum x)))]))))
@end example


@c page
@node stdlib hashtable
@section Hashtables


The @rsixlibrary{hashtables} library provides a set of operations on
hashtables.

A @emph{hashtable} is a data structure that associates keys with values.
Any object can be used as a key, provided a @emph{hash function} and a
suitable @emph{equivalence function} is available.

A hash function is a procedure that maps keys to exact integer objects.
It is the programmer's responsibility to ensure that the hash function
is compatible with the equivalence function, which is a procedure that
accepts two keys and returns true if they are equivalent and @false{}
otherwise.

Standard hashtables for arbitrary objects based on the @func{eq?} and
@func{eqv?} predicates (@ref{baselib predicates}) are provided.  Also,
hash functions for arbitrary objects, strings, and symbols are provided.

This section uses the @var{hashtable} parameter name for arguments that
must be hashtables, and the @var{key} parameter name for arguments that
must be hashtable keys.


@menu
* stdlib hashtable constructors::       Constructors.
* stdlib hashtable procedures::         Procedures.
* stdlib hashtable inspection::         Inspection.
* stdlib hashtable hash functions::     Hash functions.
@end menu


@c page
@node stdlib hashtable constructors
@subsection Constructors


@deffn Procedure make-eq-hashtable
@deffnx Procedure make-eq-hashtable @var{k}
Return a newly allocated mutable hashtable that accepts arbitrary
objects as keys, and compares those keys with @func{eq?}.  If an
argument is given, the initial capacity of the hashtable is set to
approximately @var{k} elements.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-eqv-hashtable
@deffnx Procedure make-eqv-hashtable @var{k}
Return a newly allocated mutable hashtable that accepts arbitrary
objects as keys, and compares those keys with @func{eqv?}.  If an
argument is given, the initial capacity of the hashtable is set to
approximately @var{k} elements.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure make-hashtable @var{hash-function} @var{equiv}
@deffnx Procedure make-hashtable @var{hash-function} @var{equiv} @var{k}
@var{hash-function} and @var{equiv} must be procedures.
@var{hash-function} should accept a key as an argument and should return
a non--negative exact integer object.  @var{equiv} should accept two
keys as arguments and return a single value.  Neither procedure should
mutate the hashtable returned by @func{make-hashtable}.

The @func{make-hashtable} procedure returns a newly allocated mutable
hashtable using @var{hash-function} as the hash function and @var{equiv}
as the equivalence function used to compare keys.  If a third argument
is given, the initial capacity of the hashtable is set to approximately
@var{k} elements.

Both @var{hash-function} and @var{equiv} should behave like pure
functions on the domain of keys.  For example, the @func{string-hash}
and @func{string=?} procedures are permissible only if all keys are
strings and the contents of those strings are never changed so long as
any of them continues to serve as a key in the hashtable.  Furthermore,
any pair of keys for which @var{equiv} returns true should be hashed to
the same exact integer objects by @var{hash-function}.

@strong{Implementation responsibilities:} The implementation must check
the restrictions on @var{hash-function} and @var{equiv} to the extent
performed by applying them as described.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Hashtables are allowed to cache the results of calling the
hash function and equivalence function, so programs cannot rely on the
hash function being called for every lookup or update.  Furthermore any
hashtable operation may call the hash function more than once.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib hashtable procedures
@subsection Procedures


@deffn Procedure {hashtable?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a hashtable, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure hashtable-size @var{hashtable}
Return the number of keys contained in @var{hashtable} as an exact
integer object.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure hashtable-ref @var{hashtable} @var{key} @var{default}
Return the value in @var{hashtable} associated with @var{key}.  If
@var{hashtable} does not contain an association for @var{key},
@var{default} is returned.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {hashtable-set!} @var{hashtable} @var{key} @var{obj}
Change @var{hashtable} to associate @var{key} with @var{obj}, adding a
new association or replacing any existing association for @var{key}, and
returns unspecified values.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {hashtable-delete!} @var{hashtable} @var{key}
Remove any association for @var{key} within @var{hashtable} and returns
unspecified values.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {hashtable-contains?} @var{hashtable} @var{key}
Return @true{} if @var{hashtable} contains an association for @var{key},
@false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {hashtable-update!} @var{hashtable} @var{key} @var{proc} @var{default}
@var{proc} should accept one argument, should return a single value, and
should not mutate @var{hashtable}.

The @func{hashtable-update!} procedure applies @var{proc} to the value
in @var{hashtable} associated with @var{key}, or to @var{default} if
@var{hashtable} does not contain an association for @var{key}.  The
@var{hashtable} is then changed to associate @var{key} with the value
returned by @var{proc}.

The behavior of @func{hashtable-update!} is equivalent to the following
code, but may be implemented more efficiently in cases where the
implementation can avoid multiple lookups of the same key:

@example
(hashtable-set!
  hashtable key
  (proc (hashtable-ref
         hashtable key default)))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure hashtable-copy @var{hashtable}
@deffnx Procedure hashtable-copy @var{hashtable} @var{mutable}
Return a copy of @var{hashtable}.  If the @var{mutable} argument is
provided and is true, the returned hashtable is mutable; otherwise it is
immutable.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {hashtable-clear!} @var{hashtable}
@deffnx Procedure {hashtable-clear!} @var{hashtable} @var{k}
Remove all associations from @var{hashtable} and returns unspecified
values.

If a second argument is given, the current capacity of the hashtable is
reset to approximately @var{k} elements.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure hashtable-keys @var{hashtable}
Return a vector of all keys in @var{hashtable}.  The order of the vector
is unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure hashtable-entries @var{hashtable}
Return two values, a vector of the keys in @var{hashtable}, and a vector
of the corresponding values.

Example:

@example
(let ((h (make-eqv-hashtable)))
  (hashtable-set! h 1 'one)
  (hashtable-set! h 2 'two)
  (hashtable-set! h 3 'three)
  (hashtable-entries h))
@result{} #(1 2 3) #(one two three) ; two return values
@end example

@noindent
the order of the entries in the result vectors is not known.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib hashtable inspection
@subsection Inspection


@deffn Procedure hashtable-equivalence-function @var{hashtable}
Return the equivalence function used by @var{hashtable} to compare keys.
For hashtables created with @func{make-eq-hashtable} and
@func{make-eqv-hashtable}, returns @func{eq?} and @func{eqv?}
respectively.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure hashtable-hash-function @var{hashtable}
Return the hash function used by @var{hashtable}.  For hashtables
created by @func{make-eq-hashtable} or @func{make-eqv-hashtable},
@false{} is returned.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {hashtable-mutable?} @var{hashtable}
Return @true{} if @var{hashtable} is mutable, otherwise @false{}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib hashtable hash functions
@subsection Hash functions


The @func{equal-hash}, @func{string-hash}, and @func{string-ci-hash}
procedures of this section are acceptable as the hash functions of a
hashtable only if the keys on which they are called are not mutated
while they remain in use as keys in the hashtable.


@deffn Procedure equal-hash @var{obj}
Return an integer hash value for @var{obj}, based on its structure and
current contents.  This hash function is suitable for use with
@func{equal?} as an equivalence function.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Like @func{equal?}, the @func{equal-hash} procedure must
always terminate, even if its arguments contain cycles.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-hash @var{string}
Return an integer hash value for @var{string}, based on its current
contents.  This hash function is suitable for use with @func{string=?}
as an equivalence function.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure string-ci-hash @var{string}
Return an integer hash value for @var{string} based on its current
contents, ignoring case.  This hash function is suitable for use with
@func{string-ci=?} as an equivalence function.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure symbol-hash @var{symbol}
Return an integer hash value for @var{symbol}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib enum
@section Enumerations


This chapter describes the @rsixlibrary{enums} library for dealing with
enumerated values and sets of enumerated values.  Enumerated values are
represented by ordinary symbols, while finite sets of enumerated values
form a separate type, known as the @emph{enumeration sets}.  The
enumeration sets are further partitioned into sets that share the same
@emph{universe} and @emph{enumeration type}.  These universes and
enumeration types are created by the @func{make-enumeration} procedure.
Each call to that procedure creates a new enumeration type.

This library interprets each enumeration set with respect to its
specific universe of symbols and enumeration type.  This facilitates
efficient implementation of enumeration sets and enables the complement
operation.

In the descriptions of the following procedures, @var{enum-set} ranges
over the enumeration sets, which are defined as the subsets of the
universes that can be defined using @func{make-enumeration}.


@deffn Procedure make-enumeration @var{symbol-list}
@var{symbol-list} must be a list of symbols.

The @func{make-enumeration} procedure creates a new enumeration type
whose universe consists of those symbols (in canonical order of their
first appearance in the list) and returns that universe as an
enumeration set whose universe is itself and whose enumeration type is
the newly created enumeration type.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure enum-set-universe @var{enum-set}
Return the set of all symbols that comprise the universe of its
argument, as an enumeration set.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure enum-set-indexer @var{enum-set}
Return a unary procedure that, given a symbol that is in the universe of
@var{enum-set}, returns its 0--origin index within the canonical
ordering of the symbols in the universe; given a symbol not in the
universe, the unary procedure returns @false{}.

@example
(let* ((e (make-enumeration '(red green blue)))
       (i (enum-set-indexer e)))
  (list (i 'red) (i 'green) (i 'blue) (i 'yellow)))
@result{} (0 1 2 #f)
@end example

The @func{enum-set-indexer} procedure could be defined as follows using
the @func{memq} procedure from the @rsixlibrary{lists} library:

@example
(define (enum-set-indexer set)
  (let* ((symbols (enum-set->list
                    (enum-set-universe set)))
         (cardinality (length symbols)))
    (lambda (x)
      (cond
       ((memq x symbols)
        => (lambda (probe)
             (- cardinality (length probe))))
       (else #f)))))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure enum-set-constructor @var{enum-set}
Return a unary procedure that, given a list of symbols that belong to
the universe of @var{enum-set}, returns a subset of that universe that
contains exactly the symbols in the list.  The values in the list must
all belong to the universe.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure enum-set->list @var{enum-set}
Return a list of the symbols that belong to its argument, in the
canonical order of the universe of @var{enum-set}.

@example
(let* ((e (make-enumeration '(red green blue)))
       (c (enum-set-constructor e)))
  (enum-set->list (c '(blue red))))    @result{} (red blue)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {enum-set-member?} @var{symbol} @var{enum-set}
@deffnx Procedure {enum-set-subset?} @vari{enum-set} @varii{enum-set}
@deffnx Procedure {enum-set=?} @vari{enum-set} @varii{enum-set}
The @func{enum-set-member?} procedure returns @true{} if its first
argument is an element of its second argument, @false{} otherwise.

The @func{enum-set-subset?} procedure returns @true{} if the universe of
@vari{enum-set} is a subset of the universe of @varii{enum-set}
(considered as sets of symbols) and every element of @vari{enum-set} is
a member of @varii{enum-set}.  It returns @false{} otherwise.

The @func{enum-set=?} procedure returns @true{} if @vari{enum-set} is a
subset of @varii{enum-set} and vice versa, as determined by the
@func{enum-set-subset?} procedure.  This implies that the universes of
the two sets are equal as sets of symbols, but does not imply that they
are equal as enumeration types.  Otherwise, @false{} is returned.

@example
(let* ((e (make-enumeration '(red green blue)))
       (c (enum-set-constructor e)))
  (list
   (enum-set-member? 'blue (c '(red blue)))
   (enum-set-member? 'green (c '(red blue)))
   (enum-set-subset? (c '(red blue)) e)
   (enum-set-subset? (c '(red blue)) (c '(blue red)))
   (enum-set-subset? (c '(red blue)) (c '(red)))
   (enum-set=? (c '(red blue)) (c '(blue red)))))
@result{} (#t #f #t #t #f #t)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure enum-set-union @vari{enum-set} @varii{enum-set}
@deffnx Procedure enum-set-intersection @vari{enum-set} @varii{enum-set}
@deffnx Procedure enum-set-difference @vari{enum-set} @varii{enum-set}
@vari{enum-set} and @varii{enum-set} must be enumeration sets that have
the same enumeration type.

The @func{enum-set-union} procedure returns the union of @vari{enum-set}
and @varii{enum-set}.  The @func{enum-set-intersection} procedure
returns the intersection of @vari{enum-set} and @varii{enum-set}.  The
@func{enum-set-difference} procedure returns the difference of
@vari{enum-set} and @varii{enum-set}.

@example
(let* ((e (make-enumeration '(red green blue)))
       (c (enum-set-constructor e)))
  (list (enum-set->list
         (enum-set-union (c '(blue)) (c '(red))))
        (enum-set->list
         (enum-set-intersection (c '(red green))
                                (c '(red blue))))
        (enum-set->list
         (enum-set-difference (c '(red green))
                              (c '(red blue))))))
@result{} ((red blue) (red) (green))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure enum-set-complement @var{enum-set}
Return @var{enum-set}'s complement with respect to its universe.

@example
(let* ((e (make-enumeration '(red green blue)))
       (c (enum-set-constructor e)))
  (enum-set->list
    (enum-set-complement (c '(red)))))
@result{} (green blue)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure enum-set-projection @vari{enum-set} @varii{enum-set}
Project @vari{enum-set} into the universe of @varii{enum-set}, dropping
any elements of @vari{enum-set} that do not belong to the universe of
@varii{enum-set}.  (If @vari{enum-set} is a subset of the universe of
its second, no elements are dropped, and the injection is returned.)

@example
(let ((e1 (make-enumeration
            '(red green blue black)))
      (e2 (make-enumeration
            '(red black white))))
  (enum-set->list
    (enum-set-projection e1 e2))))
@result{} (red black)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-enumeration @hyper{type-name} (@hyper{symbol} @dots{}) @hyper{constructor-syntax}
The @func{define-enumeration} form defines an enumeration type and
provides two macros for constructing its members and sets of its
members.

A @func{define-enumeration} form is a definition and can appear anywhere
any other @hyper{definition} can appear.

@hyper{type-name} is an identifier that is bound as a syntactic keyword;
@hyper{symbol} @dots{} are the symbols that comprise the universe of the
enumeration (in order).

@code{(@hyper{type-name} @hyper{symbol})} checks at macro-expansion time
whether the name of @hyper{symbol} is in the universe associated with
@hyper{type-name}.  If it is, @code{(@hyper{type-name} @hyper{symbol})}
is equivalent to @code{@hyper{symbol}}.  It is a syntax violation if it
is not.

@hyper{constructor-syntax} is an identifier that is bound to a macro
that, given any finite sequence of the symbols in the universe, possibly
with duplicates, expands into an expression that evaluates to the
enumeration set of those symbols.

@code{(@hyper{constructor-syntax} @hyper{symbol} ...)} checks at
macro-expansion time whether every @hyper{symbol} ... is in the universe
associated with @hyper{type-name}.  It is a syntax violation if one or
more is not.  Otherwise:

@example
(@hyper{constructor-syntax} @hyper{symbol} ...)
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to:

@example
((enum-set-constructor (@hyper{constructor-syntax}))
 '(@hyper{symbol} ...))
@end example

Example:

@example
(define-enumeration color
  (black white purple maroon)
  color-set)

(color black)                      @result{} black
(color purpel)                     @result{} exception &syntax
(enum-set->list (color-set))       @result{} ()
(enum-set->list
  (color-set maroon white))        @result{} (white maroon)
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} In @code{(@hyper{type-name} @hyper{symbol})} and
@code{(@hyper{constructor-syntax} @hyper{symbol} ...)} forms, only the
names of the @hyper{symbol}s are significant.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib complib
@section Composite library


The @rsixlibrary{} library is a composite of most of the libraries
described in this report.  The only exceptions are:

@table @rsixlibrary
@item eval
@item mutable-pairs
@item mutable-strings
@item r5rs
@end table

The library exports all procedures and syntactic forms provided by the
component libraries.

All of the bindings exported by @rsixlibrary{} are exported for both
@code{run} and @code{expand}; @ref{lang library import export}.


@c page
@node stdlib eval
@section Evaluation


The @rsixlibrary{eval} library allows a program to create Scheme
expressions as data at run time and evaluate them.


@deffn Procedure eval @var{expression} @var{environment}
Evaluate @var{expression} in the specified environment and returns its
value.  @var{expression} must be a syntactically valid Scheme expression
represented as a datum value, and @var{environment} must be an
@emph{environment}, which can be created using the @func{environment}
procedure described below.

If the first argument to @code{eval} is determined not to be a
syntactically correct expression, then @func{eval} must raise an
exception with condition type @code{&syntax}.  Specifically, if the
first argument to @code{eval} is a definition or a splicing @func{begin}
form containing a definition, it must raise an exception with condition
type @code{&syntax}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure environment @var{import-spec} @dots{}
@var{import-spec} must be a datum representing an @hyper{import spec}
(@ref{lang library form}).

The @func{environment} procedure returns an environment corresponding to
@var{import-spec}.

The bindings of the environment represented by the specifier are
immutable: If @func{eval} is applied to an expression that is determined
to contain an assignment to one of the variables of the environment,
then @func{eval} must raise an exception with a condition type
@code{&syntax}.
@ignore
The errata corrige says to append the following here:

  for consistency with treatement of similar situations as syntax
  violations in section 7.1 of the base document.

but I see no &syntax in section 7.1 of R6RS document.
@end ignore

@example
(library (foo)
  (export)
  (import (rnrs)
          (rnrs eval))
  (write
    (eval '(let ((x 3)) x)
          (environment '(rnrs)))))      ;; writes 3

(library (foo)
  (export)
  (import (rnrs)
          (rnrs eval))
  (write
    (eval
      '(eval:car (eval:cons 2 4))
      (environment
        '(prefix (only (rnrs) car cdr cons null?)
                 eval:)))))             ;; writes 2
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib mutable pairs
@section Mutable pairs


The procedures provided by the @rsixlibrary{mutable-pairs} library allow
new values to be assigned to the car and cdr fields of previously
allocated pairs.


@deffn Procedure {set-car!} @var{pair} @var{obj}
Store @var{obj} in the car field of @var{pair}.  The @func{set-car!}
procedure returns unspecified values.

@example
(define (f) (list 'not-a-constant-list))
(define (g) '(constant-list))
(set-car! (f) 3)        @result{} unspecified
(set-car! (g) 3)        @result{} unspecified
                        ; should raise exception &assertion
@end example

If an immutable pair is passed to @func{set-car!}, an exception with
condition type @code{&assertion} should be raised.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {set-cdr!} @var{pair} @var{obj}
Store @var{obj} in the cdr field of @var{pair}.  The @func{set-cdr!}
procedure returns unspecified values.

If an immutable pair is passed to @func{set-cdr!}, an exception with
condition type @code{&assertion} should be raised.

@example
(let ((x (list 'a 'b 'c 'a))
      (y (list 'a 'b 'c 'a 'b 'c 'a)))
  (set-cdr! (list-tail x 2) x)
  (set-cdr! (list-tail y 5) y)
  (list
   (equal? x x)
   (equal? x y)
   (equal? (list x y 'a) (list y x 'b))))
@result{}  (#t #t #f)
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib mutable strings
@section Mutable strings


The @func{string-set!} procedure provided by the
@rsixlibrary{mutable-strings} library allows mutating the characters of
a string in--place.


@deffn Procedure {string-set!} @var{string} @var{k} @var{char}
@var{k} must be a valid index of @var{string}.

The @func{string-set!} procedure stores @var{char} in element @var{k} of
@var{string} and returns unspecified values.

Passing an immutable string to @func{string-set!} should cause an
exception with condition type @code{&assertion} to be raised.

@example
(define (f) (make-string 3 #\*))
(define (g) "***")
(string-set! (f) 0 #\?)         @result{} unspecified
(string-set! (g) 0 #\?)         @result{} unspecified
                                ; should raise exception &assertion

(string-set! (symbol->string 'immutable)
             0
             #\?)               @result{} unspecified
                                ; should raise exception &assertion
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Implementors should make @func{string-set!} run in constant
time.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure {string-fill!} @var{string} @var{char}
Store @var{char} in every element of the given @var{string} and returns
unspecified values.
@end deffn


@c page
@node stdlib rfive compat
@section @rnrs{5} compatibility


The features described in this chapter are exported from the
@rsixlibrary{r5rs} library and provide some functionality of the
preceding revision of this report that was omitted from the main part of
the current report.


@deffn Procedure exact->inexact @var{z}
@deffnx Procedure inexact->exact @var{z}
These are the same as the @code{inexact} and @code{exact} procedures;
@ref{baselib math ops exactness}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure quotient @vari{n} @varii{n}
@deffnx Procedure remainder @vari{n} @varii{n}
@deffnx Procedure modulo @vari{n} @varii{n}
These procedures implement number--theoretic (integer) division.
@varii{N} must be non--zero.  All three procedures return integer
objects.  If @vari{n}/@varii{n} is an integer object:

@example
(quotient @vari{n} @varii{n})   @result{} @vari{n}/@varii{n}
(remainder @vari{n} @varii{n})  @result{} 0
(modulo @vari{n} @varii{n})     @result{} 0
@end example

If @vari{n}/@varii{n} is not an integer object:

@example
(quotient @vari{n} @varii{n})   @result{} @var{n_q}
(remainder @vari{n} @varii{n})  @result{} @var{n_r}
(modulo @vari{n} @varii{n})     @result{} @var{n_m}
@end example

@noindent
where @var{n_q} is @vari{n}/@varii{n} rounded towards zero,

@example
0 < |@var{n_r}| < |@varii{n}|
0 < |@var{n_m}| < |@varii{n}|
@end example

@noindent
@var{n_r} and @var{n_m} differ from @vari{n} by a multiple of @varii{n},
@var{n_r} has the same sign as @vari{n}, and @var{n_m} has the same sign
as @varii{n}.

Consequently, for integer objects @vari{n} and @varii{n} with @varii{n}
not equal to 0,

@example
(= @vari{n} (+ (* @varii{n} (quotient @vari{n} @varii{n}))
               (remainder @vari{n} @varii{n})))
@result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
provided all number object involved in that computation are exact.

@example
(modulo 13 4)           @result{}  1
(remainder 13 4)        @result{}  1

(modulo -13 4)          @result{}  3
(remainder -13 4)       @result{}  -1

(modulo 13 -4)          @result{}  -3
(remainder 13 -4)       @result{}  1

(modulo -13 -4)         @result{}  -1
(remainder -13 -4)      @result{}  -1

(remainder -13 -4.0)    @result{}  -1.0
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} These procedures could be defined in terms of @func{div}
and @func{mod} (@ref{baselib math ops arithmetic}) as follows (without
checking of the argument types):

@example
(define (sign n)
  (cond
    ((negative? n) -1)
    ((positive? n) 1)
    (else 0)))

(define (quotient n1 n2)
  (* (sign n1) (sign n2) (div (abs n1) (abs n2))))

(define (remainder n1 n2)
  (* (sign n1) (mod (abs n1) (abs n2))))

(define (modulo n1 n2)
  (* (sign n2) (mod (* (sign n2) n1) (abs n2))))
@end example
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax delay @hyper{expression}
The @func{delay} construct is used together with the procedure
@func{force} to implement @emph{lazy evaluation} or @emph{call by need}.

@code{(delay @hyper{expression})} returns an object called a
@emph{promise} which at some point in the future may be asked (by the
@func{force} procedure) to evaluate @hyper{expression}, and deliver the
resulting value.  The effect of @hyper{expression} returning multiple
values is unspecified.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure force @var{promise}
@var{promise} must be a promise.

The @func{force} procedure forces the value of @var{promise}.  If no
value has been computed for the promise, then a value is computed and
returned.  The value of the promise is cached (or ``memoized'') so that
if it is forced a second time, the previously computed value is
returned.

@example
(force (delay (+ 1 2)))                 @result{}  3

(let ((p (delay (+ 1 2))))
  (list (force p) (force p)))           @result{}  (3 3)

(define a-stream
  (letrec ((next
            (lambda (n)
              (cons n (delay (next (+ n 1)))))))
    (next 0)))
(define head car)
(define tail
  (lambda (stream) (force (cdr stream))))

(head (tail (tail a-stream)))           @result{}  2
@end example

Promises are mainly intended for programs written in functional style.
The following examples should not be considered to illustrate good
programming style, but they illustrate the property that only one value
is computed for a promise, no matter how many times it is forced.

@example
(define count 0)
(define p
  (delay (begin (set! count (+ count 1))
                (if (> count x)
                    count
                    (force p)))))
(define x 5)
p                     @result{}  a promise
(force p)             @result{}  6
p                     @result{}  a promise, still
(begin (set! x 10)
       (force p))     @result{}  6
@end example

Here is a possible implementation of @func{delay} and @func{force}.
Promises are implemented here as procedures of no arguments, and
@func{force} simply calls its argument:

@example
(define force
  (lambda (object)
    (object)))
@end example

The expression:

@example
(delay @hyper{expression})
@end example

@noindent
has the same meaning as the procedure call:

@example
(make-promise (lambda () @hyper{expression}))
@end example

@noindent
as follows:

@example
(define-syntax delay
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((delay expression)
     (make-promise (lambda () expression)))))
@end example

@noindent
where @func{make-promise} is defined as follows:

@example
(define make-promise
  (lambda (proc)
    (let ((result-ready?  #f)
          (result         #f))
      (lambda ()
        (if result-ready?
            result
            (let ((x (proc)))
              (if result-ready?
                  result
                  (begin (set! result-ready? #t)
                         (set! result x)
                         result))))))))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure null-environment @var{n}
@var{n} must be the exact integer object 5.

The @func{null-environment} procedure returns an environment specifier
suitable for use with @func{eval} representing an environment that is
empty except for the (syntactic) bindings for all keywords described in
the previous revision of this report, including bindings for @code{=>},
@code{...}, @code{else}, and @code{_} that are the same as those in the
@rsixlibrary{base} library.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure scheme-report-environment @var{n}
@var{n} must be the exact integer object 5.

The @func{scheme-report-environment} procedure returns an environment
specifier for an environment that is empty except for the bindings for
the identifiers described in the previous revision of this report,
omitting @func{load}, @func{interaction-environment},
@func{transcript-on}, @func{transcript-off}, and @func{char-ready?}.

The variable bindings have as values the procedures of the same names
described in this report, and the keyword bindings, including @code{=>},
@code{...}, @code{else}, and @code{_} are the same as those described in
this report.
@end deffn


@c page
@node naulib
@chapter The @library{nausicaa} language


This chapter describes the @library{nausicaa} language and its
differences from the @library{rnrs} language.  Most of them are the
revised implementations of @srfi{} specifications that were voted to the
@emph{final} status.


@menu
* naulib features::             Feature-based conditional expansion.
* naulib funcs::                Functions.
* naulib pretty::               Pretty printing.
* naulib macros::               Syntactic abstractions.
* naulib parameters::           Paremeter objects.
* naulib shared::               External representation for data
                                with shared structure.
* naulib environment::          Accessing environment variables.
* naulib unimplemented::        Unimplemented error condition.
@end menu

@c page
@node naulib features
@section Feature--based conditional expansion


It is desirable that programs which depend on additions to the standard
Scheme language name those additions.  For example the @srfi{}s provide
the specifications of some additions (``features'').  The
@func{cond-expand} syntax described below provides the means to actually
check that features are present in the Scheme system.

A particular functionality may exist in several or even most Scheme
systems but its @api{} may be different (use of a procedure or
special--form, name, number of parameters, etc).  To write code that
will run on several Scheme systems, it is useful to have a common
construct to enable or disable sections of code based on the existence
or absence of a feature in the Scheme system being used.

Features are identified by feature identifiers.  In order for the
semantics of this construct to be well--defined, the feature identifier
must of course refer to a feature which has a well--defined meaning.
There is thus a need for a registry to keep track of the formal
specification associated with each valid feature--identifier.


@deffn Syntax cond-expand @meta{clause} ...
@deffnx Syntax cond-expand @meta{clause} ... (else @meta{body})
Test for the existence of features at macro--expansion time.  Each
@var{clause} has the following formal definition:

@example
<clause>
        -> (<feature requirement> <body>)

<feature requirement>
        -> <feature identifier>
         | (and <feature requirement>*)
         | (or  <feature requirement>*)
         | (not <feature requirement>)

<feature identifier>
        -> one of the symbols described below, or "else"
@end example

@func{cond-expand} either expands into the @meta{body} of one of its
clauses or signals an error during syntactic processing.
@func{cond-expand} expands into the body of the first clause whose
feature requirement is currently satisfied (the @code{else} clause, if
present, is selected if none of the previous clauses is selected).

A @meta{feature requirement} has an obvious interpretation as a logical
formula, where the @meta{feature identifier} symbols have meaning true
if the associated feature is in effect at the location of the
@func{cond-expand} form, and @false{} otherwise.  A feature requirement
is satisfied if its formula is true under this interpretation.

Examples:

@example
(cond-expand
  ((or linux macos)
   ---)
  (windows
   ---))
@end example
@end deffn


What follows is the list of supported features.

@table @code
@item ikarus
@itemx larceny
@itemx mosh
@itemx ypsilon
The name of the underlying Scheme implementation.

@item linux-gnu
@itemx openbsd
@itemx winnt3.5
@itemx sysv4
@itemx darwin
@itemx ...
Platform identifiers selected by the @code{AC_CANONICAL_TARGET} macro of
@gnu{} Autoconf.  @xref{Canonicalizing, Canonicalizing, Getting the
Canonical System Type, autoconf, @gnu{} Autoconf}.

@item r6rs
The @rnrs{6} Scheme language.

@item and-let*
The @func{and-let*} syntax.

@item begin0
The @func{begin0} syntax.

@item char-sets
The @library{char-sets} library.

@item checks
The @library{checks} library.

@item compare
The @library{compare} library.

@item cut
The @func{cut} and @func{cute} syntaxes.

@item loops
The @library{loops} library.

@item format
The @library{format} library.

@item lists
The @library{lists} library.

@item parameters
The parameter objects feature.

@item random
The @library{random} library.

@item recursion
The @func{recursion} syntax.

@item receive
The @func{receive} syntax.

@item sharing
The shared structures reading/writing @srfi{} functions.

@item streams
The @library{streams} library.

@item strings
The @library{strings} library.

@item time
The @library{time} library.

@item vectors
The @library{vectors} library.
@end table


@c page
@node naulib funcs
@section Functions


@defun = @var{x} ...
An extension of the @rnrs{6} @func{=} function that also accepts zero
and one arguments.  When called with no arguments, return @true{}.  When
called with one argument, return the result of comparing it with itself.
@end defun


@defun non-negative? @var{x}
@defunx non-positive? @var{x}
Return @true{} if @var{x} is strictly positive or strictly negative.
@end defun


@defun finite? @var{z}
@defunx infinite? @var{z}
@defunx nan? @var{z}
Wrappers for the functions defined by @rnrs{6} that apply the predicate
to both the real and imaginary parts of @var{z}.

The specifications of the @rnrs{6} functions mandates that the argument
can only be a real number.
@end defun


@defun {symbol*->string} @var{obj}
Convert the symbol or string @var{obj} to a string.  If @var{obj} is a
string return it, else apply @func{symbol->string} to it and return the
result.
@end defun


@defun {symbol->string/maybe} @var{obj}
If @var{obj} is a symbol: Convert it to string and return the result;
else if it is a string, return it.  If it is neither a string nor a
symbol: Raise an assertion violation.
@end defun

@c page
@node naulib pretty
@section Pretty printing


The following bindings are exported by the @library{pretty-print}
library and re--exported by the @library{nausicaa} library.


@defun pretty-print @var{obj}
@defunx pretty-print @var{obj} @var{port}
Print a human readable representation of @var{obj} to @var{port} or the
return value of @func{current-output-port}.
@end defun

@c page
@node naulib macros
@section Syntactic abstractions


The following bindings are exported by the @library{language-extensions}
library and re--exported by the @library{nausicaa} library.


@deffn Syntax and-let* @var{formals} . @var{body}
Like an ordinary @func{and}, an @func{and-let*} special form evaluates
the expressions in @var{formals} in order until the first one that
yields @false{}.  Unlike @func{and}, however, a non--@false{} result of
one expression can be bound to a fresh variable and used in the
subsequent expressions.  @func{and-let*} is a cross--breed between
@func{let*} and @func{and}.

@var{formals} can be the empty list, or a list of the following
elements:

@table @code
@item (@var{varname} @var{expression})
evaluate @var{expression}; if the result is @false{}: return @false{}
immediately, else bind the result to @var{varname}; @var{varname} is
available to the rest of the @var{expressions}, and the @code{BODY};

@item @var{expression}
evaluate @var{expression}; if the result is @false{}: return @false{}
immediately;

@item @var{bound-variable}
look up @var{bound-variable}; if the value is @false{}; return @false{}
immediately; @var{bound-varname} is available to the rest of the
@var{expressions}, and the @var{body}.
@end table

If all the @var{expression}s and @var{bound-variable}s in @var{formals}
evaluate to true, the forms in @var{body} are evaluated and the result
of the last one returned.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Syntax begin0 @var{form0} @var{form} ...
Evaluate all the @var{form}s like the standard @func{begin}, but return
the value of @var{form0}.  The implementation comes from the @rnrs{6}
original document, Appendix A ``Formal semantics''.

@example
(define-syntax begin0
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?form0 ?form ...)
     (call-with-values
         (lambda () ?form0)
       (lambda x
         ?form ...
         (apply values x))))))
@end example

This syntax is called @func{prog1} in Common Lisp and Emacs Lisp.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax begin0-let ((@varo{var} @varo{expr}) (@var{var} @var{expr}) ...) @varo{form} @var{form} ...
@deffnx Syntax begin0-let (((@varo{var} ...) @varo{expr}) ((@var{var} ...) @var{expr}) ...) @varo{form} @var{form} ...
Bind the result of @var{expr} to @var{var} as in @func{let} or
@func{let-values}, evaluate the forms in the resulting environment, then
return @varo{var} possibly as multiple values.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Syntax receive @var{formals} @var{expression} . @var{body}
The mechanism provided for binding identifiers to the values of a
multiple--valued expression are @func{call-with-values},
@func{let-values}, @func{let*-values}.  @func{receive} is another
concise and readable syntax for creating such bindings.

@var{formals} can have any of 3 forms:

@table @code
@item (variable1 ... variablen)
The environment in which the @func{receive}--expression is evaluated is
extended by binding @var{variable1}, ..., @var{variablen} to fresh
locations.  The @var{expression} is evaluated, and its values are stored
into those locations (it is an error if @var{expression} does not have
exactly @var{n} values).

@item variable
The environment in which the @func{receive}--expression is evaluated is
extended by binding @var{variable} to a fresh location.  The
@var{expression} is evaluated, its values are converted into a newly
allocated list, and the list is stored in the location bound to
@var{variable}.

@item (variable1 ... variablen . variablen+1)
The environment in which the @func{receive}--expression is evaluated is
extended by binding @var{variable1}, ..., @var{variablen+1} to fresh
locations.  The @var{expression} is evaluated.  Its first @var{n} values
are stored into the locations bound to @var{variable1}, ...,
@var{variablen}.  Any remaining values are converted into a newly
allocated list, which is stored into the location bound to
@var{variablen+1} (it is an error if @var{expression} does not have at
least @var{n} values.
@end table

In any case, the expressions in @var{body} are evaluated sequentially in
the extended environment.  The results of the last expression in the
body are the values of the @var{receive}--expression.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Syntax cut @var{slot-or-expr} ...
@deffnx Syntax cute @var{slot-or-expr} ...
When programming in functional style, it is frequently necessary to
specialize some of the parameters of a multi--parameter procedure.  For
example, from the binary operation @func{cons} one might want to obtain
the unary operation @code{(lambda (x) (cons 1 x))}.  This specialization
of parameters is also known as ``partial application'', ``operator
section'' or ``projection''.

The @func{cut} and @func{cute} syntaxes allow to write this sort of
specialization in a simple and compact way.  Examples:

@example
(cut cons (+ a 1) <>)   = (lambda (x2)
                            (cons (+ a 1) x2))

(cut list 1 <> 3 <> 5)  = (lambda (x2 x4)
                            (list 1 x2 3 x4 5))

(cut list)              = (lambda () (list))

(cut list 1 <> 3 <...>) = (lambda (x2 . xs)
                            (apply list 1 x2 3 xs))

(cut <> a b)            = (lambda (f) (f a b))
@end example

@func{cut} specializes some of the parameters of its first argument.
The parameters that are to show up as formal variables of the result are
indicated by the symbol @code{<>}, pronouced as ``slot''.  In addition,
the symbol @code{<...>}, pronounced as ``rest--slot'', matches all
residual arguments of a variable argument procedure.  The first argument
can also be a slot.

@func{cute} evaluates the non--slot expressions at the time the
procedure is specialized, not at the time the specialized procedure is
called.  For example:

@example
(cute cons (+ a 1) <>) = (let ((a1 (+ a 1)))
                           (lambda (x2)
                             (cons a1 x2)))
@end example

@noindent
@func{cute} will evaluate @code{(+ a 1)} once, while the @func{cut}
would evaluate it during every invocation of the resulting procedure.

The formal syntax of a specialized expression is:

@example
<cut-expression> -> (cut  <slot-or-expr> <slot-or-expr>*)
                 |  (cut  <slot-or-expr> <slot-or-expr>* <...>)
                 |  (cute <slot-or-expr> <slot-or-expr>*)
                 |  (cute <slot-or-expr> <slot-or-expr>* <...>)

<slot-or-expr>   -> <>              ; a "slot"
                 |  <expression>    ; a "non-slot expression"
@end example
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Syntax recursion @var{formals} @var{body}
Allow the simple and non--imperative construction of self--referential
expressions.  The implementation is:

@example
(define-syntax recursion
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ (?name . ?variables) . ?body)
     (letrec ((?name (lambda ?variables . ?body))) ?name))
    ((_ ?name ?expr)
     (letrec ((?name ?expr)) ?name))))
@end example

@func{recursion} generates an inner lambda using @var{formals} and
@var{body}; the first identifier in @var{formals} is meant to be bound
to the inner lambda itself.  The return value is a function that invokes
the inner lambda with the inner lambda and the given arguments.

For example the following:

@example
(define (dummy n)
  (let loop ((n n))
    (if (zero? n)
        1
      (* n (loop (- n 1))))))

(dummy 5)
@end example

@noindent
can be rewritten:

@example
(letrec ((dummy (lambda (loop n)
                  (if (zero? n)
                      1
                    (* n (loop (- n 1)))))))
  (dummy 5))
@result{} 120
@end example

@noindent
which can be written:

@example
((recursion (loop n)
   (if (zero? n)
       1
     (* n (loop (- n 1)))))
 5)
@result{} 120
@end example
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Syntax do* ((@meta{variable1} @meta{init1} @meta{step1}) ...) (@meta{test} @meta{expr} ...) @meta{command} ...
Like @func{do}, but bind the variables as in @func{let*} rather than as
in @func{let}.  The @meta{step} form is optional.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Syntax dotimes (@var{varname} @var{exclusive-count}) @var{form} ...
@deffnx Syntax dotimes (@var{varname} @var{exclusive-count} @var{result}) @var{form} ...
Loop evaluating the @var{form}s and assigning @var{varname} to an
integer from zero inclusive to @var{exclusive-count}.  Return
@var{result}, or @false{} if @var{result} is not given.

Example:

@example
(dotimes (i 100)
  (display i)
  (newline))
@end example

@noindent
prints the integers in the range @code{[0, 99]}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax dolist (@var{varname} @var{list}) @var{form} ...
@deffnx Syntax dolist (@var{varname} @var{list} @var{result}) @var{form} ...
Loop evaluating the @var{form}s and assigning @var{varname} to the
elements from @var{list}.  Return @var{result}, or @false{} if
@var{result} is not given.

Example:

@example
(dolist (elm '(1 2 3))
  (display elm)
  (newline))
@end example

@noindent
prints 1, 2, 3.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax loop-upon-list (@var{varname} @var{list}) (break-when @var{test}) @var{form} ...
@deffnx Syntax loop-upon-list (@var{varname} @var{list} @var{result}) (break-when @var{test}) @var{form} ...
Loop evaluating the @var{form}s and assigning @var{varname} to the
elements from @var{list}.  Return @var{result}, or @false{} if
@var{result} is not given.  The loop is broken if @var{test} evaluates
to true.

Example:

@example
(loop-upon-list (i '(1 2 3 4) 'retval)
    (break-when (= i 3))
  (display i)
  (newline))
@end example

@noindent
prints @code{1} and @code{2}, then returns @code{retval}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax ensure @var{test} (by @var{form0} @var{form} ...) (else @var{form0} @var{form} ...)
@deffnx Syntax ensure @var{test} (by @var{form0} @var{form} ...) (else-by @var{form0} @var{form} ...) ... (else @var{form0} @var{form} ...)
Evaluate the @var{form}s in the @code{by} and @code{else-by} clauses, in
sequence, until @var{test} evaluates to true.  If the first evaluation
of @var{test} gives true: no @var{form}s are evaluated.  If neither the
@code{by} nor the @code{else-by} forms succeed in making @var{test}
true: the @var{form}s in the @code{else} clause are evaluated.

Return the value of the last @var{form} in the clause that made
@var{test} true, or the value in the last @var{form} in the @code{else}
clause, or @false{} if the first evaluation of @var{test} was true and
no @var{form}s were evaluated.

Examples:

@example
(let ((i #f))
  (ensure (= i 1)
      (by
        (set! i 1)
        123)
    (else-by
      (set! i 2)
      456)
    (else
      (set! i 3)
      789)))
=> 123

(let ((i #f))
  (ensure (= i 2)
      (by
        (set! i 1)
        123)
    (else-by
      (set! i 2)
      456)
    (else
      (set! i 3)
      789)))
=> 456

(let ((i #f))
  (ensure (= i 3)
      (by
        (set! i 1)
        123)
    (else-by
      (set! i 2)
      456)
    (else
      (set! i 3)
      789)))
=> 789
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node naulib parameters
@section Paremeter objects


The following bindings are exported by the @library{parameters}
library and re--exported by the @library{nausicaa} library.


@defun make-parameter @var{init}
@defunx make-parameter @var{init} @var{converter}
Return a new parameter object which is bound to a cell containing the
value returned by @code{(converter init)}.  If @var{converter} is not
specified, the identity function is used instead.

The parameter object is a procedure which accepts zero or one argument.
When it is called with no argument, the content of the cell bound to
this parameter object in the current dynamic environment is returned.
When it is called with one argument, the content of the cell bound to
this parameter object in the current dynamic environment is set to the
result of the call @code{(converter arg)}, where @var{arg} is the
argument passed to the parameter object, and an unspecified value is
returned.

Examples:

@example
(define radix
  (make-parameter 10))

(radix)         @result{} 10
(radix 2)
(radix)         @result{} 2
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Syntax parameterize ((@var{expr1} @var{expr2}) ...) . @var{body}
@deffnx Syntax parameterise ((@var{expr1} @var{expr2}) ...) . @var{body}
@deffnx Syntax parametrise ((@var{expr1} @var{expr2}) ...) . @var{body}
The expressions @var{expr1} and @var{expr2} are evaluated in an
unspecified order.  The value of the @var{expr1} expressions must be
parameter objects.  For each @var{expr1} expression and in an
unspecified order, the local dynamic environment is extended with a
binding of the parameter object @var{expr1} to a new cell whose content
is the result of the call @code{(converter val)}, where @var{val} is the
value of @var{expr2} and @var{converter} is the conversion procedure of
the parameter object.

The resulting dynamic environment is then used for the evaluation of the
forms in @var{body}.  The result(s) of the @func{parameterize} form are
the result(s) of the @var{body}.

With reference to the example above:

@example
(radix)
=>  2

(parameterize ((radix 16))
  (radix))
=>  16

(radix)
=>  2

(define (f n)
  (number->string n (radix)))

(f 10)
=>  "1010"

(parameterize ((radix 8))
  (f 10))
=>  "12"
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node naulib shared
@section External representation for data with shared structure


@rnrs{6} Scheme provides the procedure @func{write}, which prints
machine--readable representations of lists and other objects.  However,
the printed representation does not preserve information about what
parts of the structure are shared, and in the case of self--referential
objects the behavior of @func{write} itself is undefined; it is
permitted to go into an infinite loop.

For example, it is possible to have a list within which two or more
members are the same string (in the sense of @func{eq?}), but when the
list is written, there is not sufficient information in the
representation to recover the @func{eq?} relationship.  When the list is
read back in, there will be two or more copies of the string which are
@func{eqv?}  but not @func{eq?}.

As an example of the second problem, the results of evaluating:

@example
(define a (cons 'val1 'val2))
(set-cdr! a a)
(write a)
@end example

@noindent
are undefined.

@defun write-with-shared-structure @var{obj}
@defunx write-with-shared-structure @var{obj} @var{port}
@defunx write-with-shared-structure @var{obj} @var{port} @var{optarg}
@defunx write/ss @var{obj}
@defunx write/ss @var{obj} @var{port}
@defunx write/ss @var{obj} @var{port} @var{optarg}
Write a written representation of @var{obj} to the given @var{port}.
Strings that appear in the written representation are enclosed in
doublequotes, and within those strings backslash and doublequote
characters are escaped by backslashes.  Character objects are written
using the @code{#\} notation.

@func{write-with-shared-structure} and @func{write/ss} are bound to the
same function.

Objects which denote locations rather than values, if they appear at
more than one point in the data being written, are preceded by
@code{#N=} the first time they are written and replaced by @code{#N#}
all subsequent times they are written, where @var{N} is a natural number
used to identify that particular object.

If objects which denote locations occur only once in the structure, then
@func{write/ss} produces the same external representation for those
objects as @func{write}.

@func{write/ss} terminates in finite time when writing finite data, and
produces a finite representation when writing finite data.

@func{write/ss} returns an unspecified value.

The @var{port} argument may be omitted, in which case it defaults to the
value returned by @func{current-output-port}.

The @var{optarg} is ignored.

The following example shows a cons cell whose cdr contains itself:

@example
(define a (cons 'val1 'val2))
(set-cdr! a a)
(write/ss a)
@print{} #1=(val1 . #1#)
@end example
@end defun


@defun read-with-shared-structure
@defunx read-with-shared-structure @var{port}
@defunx read/ss
@defunx read/ss @var{port}
Convert the external representations of Scheme objects produced by
@func{write/ss} into scheme objects.  Return the next object parsable
from the given input @var{port}, updating @var{port} to point to the
first character past the end of the external representation of the
object.

@func{read-with-shared-structure} and @func{read/ss} are bound to the
same function.

If an end--of--file is encountered in the input before any characters
are found that can begin an object, then an end--of--file object is
returned.  The port remains open, and further attempts to read it (by
@func{read/ss} or @func{read}) will also return an end--of--file object.

If an end--of--file is encountered after the beginning of an object's
external representation, but the external representation is incomplete
and therefore not parsable, an error is signalled.

The @var{port} argument may be omitted, in which case it defaults to the
value returned by @func{current-input-port}.

It is an error to read from a closed port.
@end defun


@c page
@node naulib environment
@section Accessing environment variables


Most operating systems provide a mechanism for passing auxiliary
parameters implicitly to child processes.  Usually, this mechanism is
called ``the environment'', and is conceptually a map from string names
to string values.  The string names are called environment variables.

Some applications rely on environment variables to modify their behavior
according to local settings.  Also, various established protocols rely
on environment variables as a form of interprocess communication.


@deffn Procedure get-environment-variable @var{name}
Return the value of the named environment variable as a string, or
@false{} if the named environment variable is not found.  The name
argument is expected to be a string.  @func{get-environment-variable}
may use locale--setting information to encode the name and decode the
value of the environment variable.  If the value cannot be decoded, an
exception may be raised.

@example
(get-environment-variable "PATH")
@result{} "/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure get-environment-variables
Return names and values of all the environment variables as an alist.
The same decoding considerations as for @func{get-environment-variable}
apply.

@example
(get-environment-variables)
@result{} (("PATH" .
     "/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin")
    ("USERNAME" . "taro"))
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node naulib unimplemented
@section Unimplemented error condition


The following bindings are exported by the @library{unimplemented}
library and re--exported by the @library{nausicaa} library.


@deftp Condition &unimplemented
The type of condition used to signal unimplemented features.  It is
defined as:

@example
(define-condition-type &unimplemented &error
  make-unimplemented-condition
  unimplemented-condition?)
@end example
@end deftp


@defun raise-unimplemented-error @var{who}
@defunx raise-unimplemented-error @var{who} @var{message}
@defunx raise-unimplemented-error @var{who} @var{message} @var{irritants}
Raise a composite condition embedding a condition of type
@code{&unimplemented}.

@var{who} is used for the @code{&who} component.

@var{message} is used for the @code{&message} component and defaults to
@code{feature not implemented or not available}.

@var{irritants} is used for the @code{&irritants} component.
@end defun

@c page
@node conditions
@chapter Predefined condition types


The @library{conditions} library defines a set of condition types to be
used by the Nausicaa libraries.  It re--exports all the bindings from
the @library{unimplemented} library.

@menu
* conditions mismatch::         General mismatch error.
@end menu

@c page
@node conditions mismatch
@section General mismatch error


@deftp {Condition Type} &mismatch
Signal a mismatch between two values.  It is derived from
@samp{&assertion}.
@end deftp


@defun make-mismatch-condition
Build and return a new @samp{&mismatch} condition object.
@end defun


@defun mismatch-condition? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a condition of object of type
@samp{&mismatch}.
@end defun

@c page
@node lists
@chapter List library


The @library{lists} and @library{lists stx} libraries implement a
collection of functions and macros to manipulate lists.  Additionally,
@library{lists low} implements a collection of low level utilities.
These libraries have two purposes: To provide a rich set of functions
and macros and to be a source code repository from which code can be
taken and specialised.  For the last purpose, the libraries export
macros that may make little sense in most scenarios (beside the fact
that they are always inlined).

@quotation
@strong{Note} The @library{lists ---} libraries are derived from the
@ansrfi{1} document and reference implementation by Olin Shivers, but
they are @strong{not} compatible with it.  Read carefully this
documentation!
@end quotation

@menu
* lists intro::                 Introduction.
* lists conventions::           Conventions.
* lists cons::                  Constructors.
* lists pred::                  Predicates.
* lists compar::                Comparison.
* lists select::                Selectors.
* lists misc::                  Length, append, concatenate,
                                reverse, zip and count.
* lists fold::                  Fold, unfold and map.
* lists filter::                Filtering and partitioning.
* lists search::                Searching.
* lists delete::                Deletion.
* lists sorted::                Utilities for sorted lists.
* lists alist::                 Association lists.
* lists circ::                  Circular lists.
* lists set::                   Set operations on lists.
* lists low::                   Low level utilities.
@end menu

@c page
@node lists intro
@section Introduction


Scheme does not properly have a list type, just as the C language does
not have a string type.  Rather, Scheme has a binary--tuple type, from
which one can build binary trees.  There is an interpretation of Scheme
values that allows one to treat these trees as lists.  Further
complications ensue from the fact that Scheme allows side--effects to
these tuples, raising the possibility of lists of unbounded length, and
trees of unbounded depth (that is, circular data structures).

What follows is a classification of concrete values with respect to
@dfn{list} as an abstract concept.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Null value

It is a special value which can be identified with the predicate
@func{null?}.  Null is meant to represent empty lists and to be the
terminator for proper lists.

@func{length} applied to null returns zero.  In light of what follows,
it makes sense to consider null as a list of length zero for all the
list classes: proper, circular, dotted, generalised.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Proper lists

A finite, null--terminated list.  More precisely a proper list is
defined as: A pair whose cdr is a proper list or null.  The opposite of
proper is @dfn{improper}; everything that is not null or a proper list,
is an improper list.

@example
(a b c)
(32)
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Circular list

An infinite, unterminated list.  A circular list is a value such that
@func{cdr} applied any number of times always returns a pair.  The
opposite of circular is @dfn{finite}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Dotted list

A finite, non--nil terminated list, such as:

@example
(a b c . d)
(x . y)
@end example

@noindent
a dotted list is a value for which there exists an integer @math{n > 0},
such that @func{cdr} applied @math{n} times yields neither a pair nor
null.  This means that, for a dotted list, either @func{null?} or
@func{pair?} return @true{}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Generalised list

A finite, non--nil terminated list, such as:

@example
(a b c . d)
(x . y)
42
george
@end example

@noindent
an improper list is a value for which there exists an integer @math{n >=
0}, such that @func{cdr} applied @math{n} times yields neither a pair
nor null.  This includes non--pair, non--null values (symbols, numbers,
etc.), which are considered to be improper lists of length @math{0}.
Dotted lists are improper lists.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

This view is captured by the predicates @func{list?} (defined by
@rnrs{6}), @func{improper-list?} and @func{circular-list?}  which
partition the entire universe of Scheme values.  Additionally
@func{dotted-list?} recognises dotted lists.

This list library users should note that dotted lists are not commonly
used, and are considered by many Scheme programmers to be an ugly
artifact of Scheme's lack of a true list type.  However, dotted lists do
play a noticeable role in the syntax of Scheme, in the ``rest''
parameters used by n--ary lambdas:

@example
(lambda (x y . rest) ...)
@end example

Dotted lists are not fully supported by this list library.  Most
procedures are defined only on proper lists, that is: finite,
nil--terminated lists.  The procedures that will also handle circular or
dotted lists are specifically marked.  While this design decision
restricts the domain of possible arguments one can pass to these
procedures, it has the benefit of allowing the procedures to catch the
error cases where programmers inadvertently pass scalar values to a list
procedure by accident, e.g., by switching the arguments to a procedure
call.

@c page
@node lists conventions
@section Conventions


All the functions are exported by the @library{lists} library, while all
the macros are exported by @library{lists stx}.  Each macro has a
corresponding function version, but some functions were not translated
to macros.  Macro names always end with the suffix @samp{/stx}.

It is an error to pass a circular or dotted list to a procedure not
defined to accept such an argument.  It is an error to pass a proper or
dotted list to a procedure defined for circular lists.

All the functions and macros whose main name ends with @samp{!}, are
allowed, but not required, to alter their arguments.

The documentation of this library obeys the following conventions for
procedure formals:

@table @var
@item ell
A proper (finite, nil--terminated) list.

@item circ
A proper or circular list.

@item dotted
A dotted list.

@item pair
A pair.

@item n
@itemx i
A natural number (an integer @math{>= 0}).

@item proc
A procedure.

@item pred
A procedure whose return value is treated as a boolean.

@item item=
A boolean procedure taking two arguments.

@item fill
Can be any value.  This is used to indicate values used to fill a
compound data structure.

@item obj
Any value, this includes dotted lists.
@end table

@c page
@node lists cons
@section Constructors


@cindex List constructors


@defun xcons @vari{obj} @varii{obj}
The name stands for ``eXchanged CONS'', it is like @func{cons} but
reverses the arguments.  Of utility only as a value to be conveniently
passed to higher--order procedures.

@example
(cons 1 2)  @result{} (1 . 2)
(xcons 1 2) @result{} (2 . 1)
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Function make-list @var{n}
@deffnx Function make-list @var{n} @var{fill}
@deffnx Syntax make-list/stx @var{n}
@deffnx Syntax make-list/stx @var{n} @var{fill}
Return an @var{n}--element list, whose elements are all the value
@var{fill}.  If @var{fill} is not given, the elements of the list may be
arbitrary values.

@example
(make-list 4 'c)
@result{} (c c c c)

(make-list 0)
@result{} ()
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function list-copy @var{fell}
@deffnx Syntax list-copy/stx @var{fell}
Copy the spine of the argument.
@end deffn


@deffn Function tree-copy @var{fell}
@deffnx Syntax tree-copy/stx @var{fell}
Copy the whole tree of @var{fell}, not only the spine (which is what
@func{list-copy} does).
@end deffn


@deffn Function list-tabulate @var{n} @var{init-proc}
@deffnx Function list-tabulate/reverse @var{n} @var{init-proc}
@deffnx Syntax list-tabulate/stx @var{n} @var{init-proc}
@deffnx Syntax list-tabulate/reverse/stx @var{n} @var{init-proc}
Return an @var{n}--element list.  Element @math{i} of the list, where
@math{0 <= i < n}, is produced by @code{(init-proc i)}.

The basic variants build the list from element @math{0} to element
@math{n-1}.  The @samp{/reverse} variants build the lists in reversed
order, with element @math{n-1} created first.  The @samp{/reverse}
variants may be a little faster, especially for long lists.

@example
(list-tabulate 4 values)
@result{} (0 1 2 3)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function iota @var{count}
@deffnx Function iota @var{count} @var{start}
@deffnx Function iota @var{count} @var{start} @var{step}
@deffnx Syntax iota/stx @var{count}
@deffnx Syntax iota/stx @var{count} @var{start}
@deffnx Syntax iota/stx @var{count} @var{start} @var{step}
Return a list containing the elements:

@example
(start start+step ... start+(count-1)*step)
@end example

The @var{start} and @var{step} parameters default to @code{0} and
@code{1}, respectively.  @var{count} must be a non--negative number.
The resulting list is built in reverse, starting from the last element.

@example
(iota 5)
@result{} (0 1 2 3 4)

(iota 5 0 -0.1)
@result{} (0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.3 -0.4)
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node lists pred
@section Predicates


@defun not-pair? @var{obj}
Defined as:

@example
(lambda (x) (not (pair? x)))
@end example

@noindent
provided as a procedure as it can be useful as the termination condition
for list--processing procedures that wish to handle all finite lists,
both proper and dotted.
@end defun


@defun circular-list? @var{obj}
@defunx circular-list?/or-null @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a circular list.  The @samp{/or-null}
variant returns @true{} also if @var{obj} null.
@end defun


@defun dotted-list? @var{obj}
@defunx dotted-list?/or-null @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a dotted list.  The @samp{/or-null}
variant returns @true{} also if @var{obj} null.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Function and-null? @var{ell} ...
@deffnx Syntax and-null?/stx @var{ell} ...
Return @true{} if all the @var{ell} are null or no arguments are given.
@end deffn


@deffn Function or-null? @var{ell} ...
@deffnx Syntax or-null?/stx @var{ell} ...
Return @true{} if at least one of the @var{ell} is null.  Return
@false{} if no arguments are given.
@end deffn


@deffn Function and/or-null? @var{ell} ...
@deffnx Syntax and/or-null?/stx @var{ell} ...
Return two values being the return values of @func{and-null?} and
@func{or-null?} applied to the @var{ell} arguments.
@end deffn

@c page
@node lists compar
@section Comparison


@defun list=? @var{item=} @varo{ell} ...
Determines list equality, given an element--equality procedure
@var{item=}.  Proper list @vari{ell} equals proper list @varii{ell} if:

@enumerate
@item
They are of the same length.

@item
Their corresponding elements are equal, according to @var{item=}.
@end enumerate

If there are no list arguments, or only one list argument: The return
value is @true{}.  If there are two or more list arguments they are
compared in couples: First @varo{ell} is compared to @vari{ell}, then
@vari{ell} is compared to @varii{ell}, etc.  The iteration over list
arguments stops if two list arguments are found different.

@var{item=} is applied to elements from two list arguments taken with
the same order; the first from @vari{ell}, the second from @varii{ell},
etc.  @var{item=} must be consistent with @func{eq?}:

@example
(eq? x y) @result{} (elm=? x y)
@end example

@noindent
this implies that two lists which are @func{eq?} are always
@func{list=?}, as well.

Examples:

@example
(list=? eq?)
@result{} #t

(list=? eq? '(a))
@result{} #t

(list=? = '(1 2 3 4)
          '(1 2 3 4))
@result{} #t

(list=? = '(1 2 3 4)
          '(1 9 3 4))
@result{} #f

(list=? = '(1 2 3 4)
          '(1 2 3 4)
          '(1 2 3 4))
@result{} #t

(list=? = '(1 2 3 4)
          '(1 2 3 4 5)
          '(1 2 3 4))
@result{} #f

(list=? = '())
@result{} #t

(list=? = '() '())
@result{} #t

(list=? = '() '() '())
@result{} #t
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node lists select
@section Selectors


@cindex List selectors


@deffn Function first @var{pair}
@deffnx Function second  @var{pair}
@deffnx Function third   @var{pair}
@deffnx Function fourth  @var{pair}
@deffnx Function fifth   @var{pair}
@deffnx Function sixth   @var{pair}
@deffnx Function seventh @var{pair}
@deffnx Function eighth  @var{pair}
@deffnx Function ninth   @var{pair}
@deffnx Function tenth   @var{pair}
@deffnx Syntax fifth/stx   @var{pair}
@deffnx Syntax sixth/stx   @var{pair}
@deffnx Syntax seventh/stx @var{pair}
@deffnx Syntax eighth/stx  @var{pair}
@deffnx Syntax ninth/stx   @var{pair}
@deffnx Syntax tenth/stx   @var{pair}
Synonyms for @func{car}, @func{cadr}, @func{caddr}, ...

@example
(third '(a b c d e))
=> c
@end example
@end deffn


@defun {car+cdr} @var{pair}
The fundamental pair deconstructor:

@example
(lambda (p)
  (values (car p) (cdr p)))
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Function take-left @var{dotted} @var{i}
@deffnx Function drop-left @var{dotted} @var{i}
@deffnx Syntax take-left/stx @var{dotted} @var{i}
@deffnx Syntax drop-left/stx @var{dotted} @var{i}
@func{take-left} returns the first @var{i} elements of list
@var{dotted}.  @func{drop-left} returns all but the first @var{i}
elements of list @var{dotted}.

@example
(take-left '(a b c d e) 2)
=> (a b)

(drop-left '(a b c d e) 2)
=> (c d e)
@end example

@var{dotted} may be any value: a proper, circular, or dotted list:

@example
(take-left '(1 2 3 . d) 2)
=> (1 2)

(drop-left '(1 2 3 . d) 2)
=> (3 . d)

(take-left '(1 2 3 . d) 3)
=> (1 2 3)

(drop-left '(1 2 3 . d) 3)
=> d
@end example

For a legal @var{i}, @func{take-left} and @func{drop-left} partition the
list in a manner which can be inverted with append:

@example
(append (take-left x i) (drop-left x i)) = x
@end example

@func{drop-left} is exactly equivalent to performing @var{i} @func{cdr}
operations on @var{dotted}; the returned value shares a common tail with
@var{dotted}.

If the argument is a list of non--zero length, @func{take-left} is
guaranteed to return a freshly--allocated list, even in the case where
the entire list is taken: @code{(take-left dotted (length+ dotted))}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function take-right @var{dotted} @var{i}
@deffnx Function drop-right @var{dotted} @var{i}
@deffnx Syntax take-right/stx @var{dotted} @var{i}
@deffnx Syntax drop-right/stx @var{dotted} @var{i}
@func{take-right} returns the last @var{i} elements of @var{dotted}.
@func{drop-right} returns all but the last @var{i} elements of
@var{dotted}.

@example
(take-right '(a b c d e) 2)
=> (d e)

(drop-right '(a b c d e) 2)
=> (a b c)
@end example

The returned list may share a common tail with the argument list.

@var{dotted} may be any finite list, either proper or dotted:

@example
(take-right '(1 2 3 . d) 2)
=> (2 3 . d)

(drop-right '(1 2 3 . d) 2)
=> (1)

(take-right '(1 2 3 . d) 0)
=> d

(drop-right '(1 2 3 . d) 0)
=> (1 2 3)
@end example

For a legal @var{i}, @func{take-right} and @func{drop-right} partition
the list in a manner which can be inverted with append:

@example
(append (drop-right flist i) (take-right flist i)) = flist
@end example

The return value of @func{take-right} is guaranteed to share a common
tail with @var{dotted}.

If the argument is a list of non--zero length, @func{drop-right} is
guaranteed to return a freshly--allocated list, even in the case where
nothing is dropped, e.g. @code{(drop-right dotted 0)}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function take-left! @var{dotted} @var{i}
@deffnx Function drop-right! @var{dotted} @var{i}
@deffnx Syntax take-left!/stx @var{dotted} @var{i}
@deffnx Syntax drop-right!/stx @var{dotted} @var{i}
@func{take!} and @func{drop-right!} are linear--update variants of
@func{take} and @func{drop-right}: the procedure is allowed, but not
required, to alter the argument list to produce the result.

An error is raised if the length of the list is less than @var{i}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function split-at @var{x} @var{i}
@deffnx Function split-at! @var{x} @var{i}
@deffnx Syntax split-at/stx @var{x} @var{i}
@deffnx Syntax split-at!/stx @var{x} @var{i}
@func{split-at} splits the list @var{x} at index @var{i}, returning a
list of the first @var{i} elements, and the remaining tail.  It is
equivalent to:

@example
(values (take-left x i) (drop-left x i))
@end example

@func{split-at!} is the linear--update variant.  It is allowed, but not
required, to alter the argument list to produce the result.

@example
(split-at '(a b c d e f g h) 3)
=> (a b c)
   (d e f g h)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function last @var{pair}
@deffnx Function last-pair @var{pair}
@deffnx Syntax last/stx @var{pair}
@deffnx Syntax last-pair/stx @var{pair}
@func{last} returns the last element of the non--empty, finite list
@var{pair}.  @func{last-pair} returns the last pair in the non--empty,
finite list @var{pair}.

@example
(last '(a b c)) => c
(last-pair '(a b c)) => (c)
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node lists misc
@section Length, append, concatenate, reverse, zip and count


@cindex List length
@cindex List appending
@cindex List contatenation
@cindex List reversing
@cindex List zip
@cindex List counting


@defun {length+} @var{clist}
Return the length of the argument, or @false{} if @var{clist} is a
circular list.  The length of a proper list is a non--negative integer
@math{n} such that @func{cdr} applied @math{n} times to the list
produces the empty list.
@end defun


@defun append! @var{list1} ...
Return a list consisting of the elements of @var{list1} followed by the
elements of the other list parameters.  It is allowed, but not required,
to alter cons cells in the argument lists to construct the result list.
The last argument is never altered; the result list shares structure
with this parameter.

@example
(append! '(x) '(y))        =>  (x y)
(append! '(a) '(b c d))    =>  (a b c d)
(append! '(a (b)) '((c)))  =>  (a (b) (c))
(append! '(a b) '(c . d))  =>  (a b c . d)
(append! '() 'a)           =>  a
(append! '(x y))           =>  (x y)
(append!)                  =>  ()
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Function concatenate @var{list-of-lists}
@deffnx Function concatenate! @var{list-of-lists}
@deffnx Syntax concatenate/stx @var{list-of-lists}
@deffnx Syntax concatenate!/stx @var{list-of-lists}
These functions append the elements of their argument together.  That
is, @func{concatenate} returns:

@example
(apply append list-of-lists)
@end example

@noindent
or, equivalently:

@example
(reduce* append '() list-of-lists)
@end example

@func{concatenate!} is the linear--update variant, defined in terms
of @func{append!} instead of @func{append}.

Note that some Scheme implementations do not support passing more than a
certain number (e.g. 64) of arguments to an n--ary procedure.  In these
implementations, the @code{(apply append ...)} idiom would fail when
applied to long lists, but concatenate would continue to function
properly.

As with @func{append} and @func{append!}, the last element of the input
list may be any value at all.
@end deffn


@defun reverse! @var{list}
Return a newly allocated list consisting of the elements of @var{list}
in reverse order.  It is permitted, but not required, to alter the
argument's cons cells to produce the reversed list.

@example
(reverse! '(a b c))              =>  (c b a)
(reverse! '(a (b c) d (e (f))))  =>  ((e (f)) d (b c) a)
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Function append-reverse @var{rev-head} @var{tail}
@deffnx Function append-reverse! @var{rev-head} @var{tail}
@deffnx Syntax append-reverse/stx @var{rev-head} @var{tail}
@deffnx Syntax append-reverse!/stx @var{rev-head} @var{tail}
@func{append-reverse} returns:

@example
(append (reverse rev-head) tail)
@end example

It is provided because it is a common operation, a common
list--processing style calls for this exact operation to transfer values
accumulated in reverse order onto the front of another list, and because
the implementation is significantly more efficient than the simple
composition it replaces.

@quotation
But note that this pattern of iterative computation followed by a
@func{reverse} can frequently be rewritten as a recursion, dispensing
with the @func{reverse} and @func{append-reverse} steps, and shifting
temporary, intermediate storage from the heap to the stack, which is
typically a win for reasons of cache locality and eager storage
reclamation.
@end quotation

@func{append-reverse!} is just the linear--update variant; it is
allowed, but not required, to alter @var{rev-head}'s cons cells to
construct the result.
@end deffn


@deffn Function zip @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax zip/stx @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Defined as:

@example
(lambda lists (apply map list lists))
@end example

If @func{zip} is passed @var{n} lists, it returns a list as long as the
shortest of these lists, each element of which is an @var{n}--element
list comprised of the corresponding elements from the parameter lists.

@example
(zip '(one two three)
     '(1 2 3)
     '(odd even odd even odd even odd even))
  => ((one 1 odd) (two 2 even) (three 3 odd))

(zip '(1 2 3))
  => ((1) (2) (3))
@end example

At least one of the argument lists must be finite:

@example
(zip '(3 1 4 1)
     (circular-list #f #t))
=> ((3 #f)
    (1 #t)
    (4 #f)
    (1 #t))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function unzip1 @var{list}
@deffnx Function unzip2 @var{list}
@deffnx Function unzip3 @var{list}
@deffnx Function unzip4 @var{list}
@deffnx Function unzip5 @var{list}
@deffnx Syntax unzip1/stx @var{list}
@deffnx Syntax unzip2/stx @var{list}
@deffnx Syntax unzip3/stx @var{list}
@deffnx Syntax unzip4/stx @var{list}
@deffnx Syntax unzip5/stx @var{list}
@func{unzip1} takes a list of lists, where every list must contain at
least one element, and returns a list containing the initial element of
each such list.  That is, it returns @code{(map car lists)}.

@func{unzip2} takes a list of lists, where every list must contain at
least two elements, and returns two values: a list of the first
elements, and a list of the second elements.

@func{unzip3} does the same for the first three elements of the lists,
and so forth.

@example
(unzip2 '((1 one) (2 two) (3 three)))
=> (1 2 3)
   (one two three)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function count @var{pred} @var{clist1} ...
@deffnx Syntax count/stx @var{pred} @var{clist1} ...
@var{pred} is a procedure taking as many arguments as there are lists
and returning a single value.  It is applied element--wise to the
elements of the lists, and a count is tallied of the number of elements
that produce a true value.  This count is returned.

@func{count} is ``iterative'' in that it is guaranteed to apply
@var{pred} to the list elements in a left--to--right order.  The
counting stops when the shortest list expires.

@example
(count even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 5 6))                => 3
(count <     '(1 2 4 8) '(2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16))   => 3
@end example

At least one of the argument lists must be finite:

@example
(count < '(3 1 4 1) (circular-list 1 10)) => 2
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node lists fold
@section Fold, unfold and map


@cindex List fold, unfold and map


The @dfn{left--folding} operator is the fundamental list iterator, the
@dfn{right--folding} operator is the fundamental list recursion
operator.

@menu
* lists fold examples::         Folding usage examples.
* lists fold rnrs::             Folding with @rnrs{6} style.
* lists fold traditional::      Folding with traditional style.
* lists fold derived::          Derived folding.
* lists fold pair::             Folding pairs.
* lists fold reduce::           Reducing.
* lists fold unfold::           Unfolding.
* lists fold map::              Mapping.
@end menu

@c page
@node lists fold examples
@subsection Folding usage examples


In the single list argument case, for a list of @math{4} elements, the
return value of a left--folding with @rnrs{6} style, is computed as
with:

@example
(fold-left kons knil ell) =
  (kons (kons (kons (kons knil
                          (list-ref ell 0))
                    (list-ref ell 1))
              (list-ref ell 2))
        (list-ref ell 3))
@end example

@noindent
while with the ``traditional'' style:

@example
(fold kons knil ell) =
  (kons (list-ref ell 3)
        (kons (list-ref ell 2)
              (kons (list-ref ell 1)
                    (kons (list-ref ell 0)
                          knil))))
@end example

@noindent
the return value of a right--folding with both @rnrs{6} style and
``traditional'' style, is computed as with:

@example
(fold-right kons knil ell) =
     (fold* kons knil ell) =
  (kons (list-ref ell 0)
        (kons (list-ref ell 1)
              (kons (list-ref ell 2)
                    (kons (list-ref ell 3)
                          knil))))
@end example

In the multiple list arguments case, for three lists of @math{4}
elements, the return value of a left--folding with @rnrs{6} style, is
computed as with:

@example
(fold-left kons knil ell0 ell1 ell2) =
  (kons (kons (kons (kons knil
                          (list-ref ell0 0)
                          (list-ref ell1 0)
                          (list-ref ell2 0))
                    (list-ref ell0 1)
                    (list-ref ell1 1)
                    (list-ref ell2 1))
              (list-ref ell0 2)
              (list-ref ell1 2)
              (list-ref ell2 2))
        (list-ref ell0 3)
        (list-ref ell1 3)
        (list-ref ell2 3))
@end example

@noindent
while with the ``traditional'' style:

@example
(fold kons knil ell0 ell1 ell2) =
  (kons (list-ref ell0 3)
        (list-ref ell1 3)
        (list-ref ell2 3)
        (kons (list-ref ell0 2)
              (list-ref ell1 2)
              (list-ref ell2 2)
              (kons (list-ref ell0 1)
                    (list-ref ell1 1)
                    (list-ref ell2 1)
                    (kons (list-ref ell0 0)
                          (list-ref ell1 0)
                          (list-ref ell2 0)
                          knil))))
@end example

@noindent
the return value of a right--folding with both @rnrs{6} style and
``traditional'' style, is computed as with:

@example
(fold-right kons knil ell0 ell1 ell2) =
     (fold* kons knil ell0 ell1 ell2) =
  (kons (list-ref ell0 0)
        (list-ref ell1 0)
        (list-ref ell2 0)
        (kons (list-ref ell0 1)
              (list-ref ell1 1)
              (list-ref ell2 1)
              (kons (list-ref ell0 2)
                    (list-ref ell1 2)
                    (list-ref ell2 2)
                    (kons (list-ref ell0 3)
                          (list-ref ell1 3)
                          (list-ref ell2 3)
                          knil))))
@end example

Left--folding, usage examples for @func{fold} in the single list
argument case:

@example
;; add the elements
(fold + 0 '(1 2 3))             @result{} 6

;; reverse a list
(fold cons '() '(1 2 3))        @result{} (3 2 1)

;; append in reverse order
(fold cons '(4 5 6) '(3 2 1))   @result{} (1 2 3 4 5 6)

;; how many symbols?
(fold (lambda (x count)
        (if (symbol? x)
            (+ count 1)
          count))
      0
      '(a 1 b 2 c 3))           @result{} 3
@end example

Right--folding, usage examples for @func{fold*} in the single list
argument case:

@example
;; copy the list
(fold* cons '() '(1 2 3))       @result{} (1 2 3)

;; add elements
(fold* + 0 numbers)             @result{} 45

;; prepend elements
(fold* cons '(4 5 6) '(1 2 3))  @result{} (1 2 3 4 5 6)

;; filter the even numbers
(fold* (lambda (x l)
         (if (even? x)
             (cons x l)
           l))
       '()
       '(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9))
@result{} (0 2 4 6 8)
@end example

Usage examples for @func{fold} and @func{fold*} in the multiple list
argument case:

@example
(fold (lambda (a b c knil)
        (cons (list a b c) knil))
      '()
      '(1 2 3)
      '(10 20 30)
      '(100 200 300))
@result{} '((3 30 300)
     (2 20 200)
     (1 10 100))

(fold* (lambda (a b c knil)
         (cons (list a b c)
                knil))
       '()
       '(1 2 3)
       '(10 20 30)
       '(100 200 300))
@result{} ((1 10 100)
    (2 20 200)
    (3 30 300))
@end example

@c page
@node lists fold rnrs
@subsection Folding with @rnrs{6} style


Exactly as with the @func{fold-left} and @func{fold-right} functions
defined by @rnrs{6}:

@itemize
@item
With left--folding functions and syntaxes, the @strong{first} argument
to the first call to @var{combine} is @var{knil}, then it is the return
value of the previous calls to @var{combine}.

@item
With right--folding functions and syntaxes, the @strong{last} argument
to to the first evaluated call to @var{combine} is @var{knil}, then it
is the return value of the previous calls to @var{combine}.
@end itemize


@deffn Syntax fold-left/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax fold-right/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Like @func{fold-left} and @func{fold-right}, defined by @rnrs{6}, but
implemented as syntaxes.  These syntaxes exist only for completeness.
@end deffn


@deffn Function fold-left* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Function fold-right* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax fold-left*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax fold-right*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Like @func{fold-left} and @func{fold-right}, defined by @rnrs{6}, but
accept lists of different length and stop at the end of the shortest
list.  At least one of the list arguments must be finite.  The syntaxes
may be a little faster than the functions when multiple @var{clist}
arguments are involved.
@end deffn

@c page
@node lists fold traditional
@subsection Folding with traditional style


The functions @func{fold} and @func{fold*} are similar to
@func{fold-left*} and @func{fold-right*} but @var{knil} is always the
@strong{last} argument of the calls to @var{kons}.


@deffn Function fold @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax fold/stx @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Left fold the function @var{kons} over the elements of the list
arguments.  Accept lists of different length and stop at the end of the
shortest list.  At least one of the list arguments must be finite.  The
syntax may be a little faster than the function when multiple
@var{clist} arguments are involved.
@end deffn


@deffn Function fold* @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax fold*/stx @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Right fold the function @var{kons} over the elements of the list
arguments.  Accept lists of different length and stop at the end of the
shortest list.  At least one of the list arguments must be finite.  The
syntax may be a little faster than the function when multiple
@var{clist} arguments are involved.
@end deffn

@c page
@node lists fold derived
@subsection Derived folding


@deffn Function and-fold-left* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Function and-fold-right* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax and-fold-left*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax and-fold-right*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Like @func{fold-left*} and @func{fold-right*}, but stop the folding if
the value returned by @var{combine} is @false{}, in which case the
return value is @false{}.
@end deffn


@defun fold-left/pred @var{pred} @var{knil} @var{clist}
Apply @var{pred} to successive couples of elements from @var{clist};
return true if all the evaluations of @var{pred} were true.  The
iteration stops at the first @false{} return value from @var{pred}.

This function is implemented as:

@example
(define (fold-left/pred pred knil ell)
  (and-fold-left*/stx (lambda (knil item)
                        (and (pred knil item) item))
                      knil ell))
@end example

@noindent
and it can be used to implement predicates for ordering like @func{<}:

@example
(fold-left/pred < 0 '(1 2 3 4 5 6))
@result{} 6

(fold-left/pred < 0 '(1 2 3 -4 5 6))
@result{} #f
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node lists fold pair
@subsection Folding pairs


@defun pair-fold @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Analogous to @func{fold}, but @var{kons} is applied to successive
sublists of the lists, rather than successive elements; that is,
@var{kons} is applied to the pairs making up the lists, giving this
(tail) recursion:

@example
(pair-fold kons knil ell) = (let ((tail (cdr ell)))
                              (pair-fold kons
                                         (kons ell knil)
                                         tail))
(pair-fold kons knil '()) = knil
@end example

For finite lists, the @var{kons} function may reliably apply
@func{set-cdr!} to the pairs it is given without altering the sequence
of execution.

Examples:

@example
(pair-fold (lambda (elm knil)
             (cons (car elm) knil))
           '(999)
           '(1 2 3))
@result{} (3 2 1 999)

;;; destructively reverse a list
(pair-fold (lambda (pair tail)
             (set-cdr! pair tail)
             pair)
           '()
           '(0 1 2 3 4 5))
@result{} (5 4 3 2 1 0)
@end example

At least one of the list arguments must be finite.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@defun pair-fold* @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Holds the same relationship with @func{fold*} that @func{pair-fold}
holds with @func{fold}.  Obeys the recursion:

@example
(pair-fold* kons knil lis) =
    (kons lis (pair-fold* kons knil (cdr lis)))
(pair-fold* kons knil '()) = knil
@end example

Example:

@example
(pair-fold* cons '() '(a b c))
@result{} ((a b c) (b c) (c))
@end example

At least one of the list arguments must be finite.

Examples:

@example
(pair-fold* (lambda (elm knil)
              (cons (car elm) knil))
            '(999)
            '(1 2 3))
@result{} (1 2 3 999)

(pair-fold* (lambda (pair tail)
              (set-cdr! pair tail)
              pair)
            '()
            '(0 1 2 3 4 5))
@result{} (0 1 2 3 4 5)

(pair-fold* (lambda (a b c knil)
              (cons (list (car a)
                          (car b)
                          (car c))
                    knil))
            '(999)
            '(1 2 3)
            '(10 20 30)
            '(100 200 300))
@result{} '((1 10 100)
     (2 20 200)
     (3 30 300)
     999)
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node lists fold reduce
@subsection Reducing


@deffn Function reduce @var{f} @var{ridentity} @var{list}
@deffnx Syntax reduce/stx @var{f} @var{ridentity} @var{list}
@func{reduce} is a variant of @func{fold}.  @var{ridentity} should be a
``right identity'' of the procedure @var{f}; that is, for any value
@var{x} acceptable to @var{f}:

@example
(f x ridentity) = x
@end example

@func{reduce} has the following definition:

@example
if list = (), return ridentity;
otherwise, return (fold f (car list) (cdr list)).
@end example

@noindent
in other words, we compute @code{(fold f ridentity list)}.

Note that @var{ridentity} is used only in the empty--list case.

You typically use @func{reduce} when applying @var{f} is expensive and
you'd like to avoid the extra application incurred when fold applies
@var{f} to the head of list and the identity value, redundantly
producing the same value passed in to @var{f}.  For example, if @var{f}
involves searching a file directory or performing a database query, this
can be significant.

In general, however, @func{fold} is useful in many contexts where
@func{reduce} is not (consider the examples given in the @func{fold}
definition: only one of the five folds uses a function with a right
identity; the other four may not be performed with @func{reduce}).

@quotation
@emph{Note:} @acronym{MIT} Scheme and Haskell flip @var{f}'s arguments
order for their @func{reduce} and @func{fold} functions.
@end quotation

Examples:

@example
;; take the max of a list of non-negative integers
(reduce max 0 '(1 2 3 4 5 6))
@result{} 6

(reduce + 0 '(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9))
@result{} 45
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function reduce* @var{f} @var{ridentity} @var{list}
@deffnx Syntax reduce*/stx @var{f} @var{ridentity} @var{list}
@func{reduce*} is the @func{fold*} variant of
@func{reduce}.  It obeys the following definition:

@example
(reduce* f ridentity '()) = ridentity
(reduce* f ridentity '(e1)) = (f e1 ridentity) = e1
(reduce* f ridentity '(e1 e2 ...)) =
    (f e1 (reduce f ridentity (e2 ...)))
@end example

@noindent
in other words, we compute @code{(fold* f ridentity list)}.

@example
;; append a bunch of lists together
(reduce* append
         '()
         '((1 2 3)
           (4 5)
           (6 7 8 9)
           (0)))
@result{} (1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0)
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node lists fold unfold
@subsection Unfolding


@deffn Function unfold @var{stop?} @var{map-to-elm} @var{seed-step} @var{first-seed}
@deffnx Function unfold @var{stop?} @var{map-to-elm} @var{seed-step} @var{first-seed} @var{tail-gen}
@deffnx Syntax unfold/stx @var{stop?} @var{map-to-elm} @var{seed-step} @var{first-seed}
@deffnx Syntax unfold/stx @var{stop?} @var{map-to-elm} @var{seed-step} @var{first-seed} @var{tail-gen}
Generate a list from a starting value; return the result.  It is is the
fundamental recursive list constructor, just as @func{fold-right} is the
fundamental recursive list consumer.  It is best described by its basic
recursion:

@example
(unfold stop? map-to-elm seed-step seed tail-gen) =
    (if (stop? seed)
        (tail-gen seed)
      (cons (map-to-elm seed)
            (unfold stop? map-to-elm
                    seed-step (seed-step seed)
                    tail-gen)))
@end example

The arguments are:

@table @var
@item stop?
Determines when to stop: it is applied to the current seed value, and if
the return value is @true{}: unfolding stops.  If it evaluates to
@true{} at the first invocation: the return value of @func{unfold} is
the return value of @var{tail-gen}.

@item map-to-elm
Maps each seed value to the corresponding list element.  It is applied
to the current seed value and must return the value to append to the
result list.

@item seed-step
Maps each seed value to next seed value.

@item first-seed
The ``state'' value for the unfold.  It is the first seed value.

@item tail-gen
Applied to the seed value that caused @func{stop?} to return @true{},
must return the tail of the result list.  Defaults to @code{(lambda (x)
'())}.
@end table

While @func{unfold} may seem a bit abstract to novice functional
programmers, it can be used in a number of ways:

@example
;; List of squares: 1^2 ... 5^2
(unfold (lambda (x) (> x 5))
        (lambda (x) (* x x))
        (lambda (x) (+ x 1))
        1)
@result{} (1 4 9 16 25)

;; Copy a proper list.
(unfold null-list? car cdr '(1 2 3 4 5))
@result{} (1 2 3 4 5)

;; Read current input port into a list of values.
(unfold eof-object? values (lambda (x) (read)) (read))

;; Copy a possibly non-proper list:
(unfold not-pair? car cdr '(1 2 3 4 . 5) values)
@result{} (1 2 3 4 . 5)

;; Append HEAD onto TAIL:
(unfold null-list? car cdr '(1 2 3) (lambda (x) '(4 5 6)))
@result{} (1 2 3 4 5 6)
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Interested functional programmers may enjoy noting that
@func{fold-right} and @func{unfold} are in some sense inverses.  That
is, given operations @var{knull?}, @var{kar}, @var{kdr}, @var{kons}, and
@var{knil} satisfying:

@example
(kons (kar x) (kdr x)) = x and (knull? knil) = #t
@end example

@noindent
then:

@example
(fold-right kons knil (unfold knull? kar kdr x)) = x
@end example

@noindent
and:

@example
(unfold knull? kar kdr (fold-right kons knil x)) = x
@end example

This combinator sometimes is called an ``anamorphism''; when an explicit
@var{tail-gen} procedure is supplied, it is called an ``apomorphism''.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Function unfold-right @var{stop?} @var{map-to-elm} @var{seed-step} @var{first-seed}
@deffnx Function unfold-right @var{stop?} @var{map-to-elm} @var{seed-step} @var{first-seed} @var{tail}
@deffnx Syntax unfold-right/stx @var{stop?} @var{map-to-elm} @var{seed-step} @var{first-seed}
@deffnx Syntax unfold-right/stx @var{stop?} @var{map-to-elm} @var{seed-step} @var{first-seed} @var{tail}
Generate a list from a starting value; return the result.  It is the
fundamental iterative list constructor, just as @func{fold} is the
fundamental iterative list consumer.  Construct a list with the
following loop:

@example
(let loop ((seed seed)
           (ell  tail))
  (if (stop? seed)
      ell
    (loop (seed-step seed)
          (cons (map-to-elm seed) ell))))
@end example

Arguments are:

@table @var
@item stop?
Determine when to stop unfolding.

@item map-to-elm
Map each seed value to the corresponding list element.

@item seed-step
Map each seed value to next seed value.

@item first-seed
The ``state'' value for the unfold.

@item tail
List terminator; defaults to @code{'()}.
@end table

While @func{unfold-right} may seem a bit abstract to novice functional
programmers, it can be used in a number of ways:

@example
;; List of squares: 1^2 ... 10^2
(unfold-right zero?
              (lambda (x) (* x x))
              (lambda (x) (- x 1))
              5)
@result{} (1 4 9 16 25)

;; Reverse a proper list.
(unfold-right null-list? car cdr '(1 2 3 4 5))
@result{} (5 4 3 2 1)

;; Read current input port into a list of values.
(unfold-right eof-object? values (lambda (x) (read)) (read))

;; Equivalent to: (append-reverse rev-head tail)
(unfold-right null-list? car cdr '(3 2 1) '(4 5 6))
@result{} (1 2 3 4 5 6)
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Interested functional programmers may enjoy noting that
@func{fold} and @func{unfold-right} are in some sense inverses.  That
is, given operations @var{knull?}, @var{kar}, @var{kdr}, @var{kons}, and
@var{knil} satisfying:

@example
(kons (kar x) (kdr x)) = x and (knull? knil) = #t
@end example

@noindent
then:

@example
(fold kons knil (unfold-right knull? kar kdr x)) = x
@end example

@noindent
and:

@example
(unfold-right knull? kar kdr (fold kons knil x)) = x.
@end example

This combinator presumably has some pretentious mathematical name;
interested readers are invited to communicate it to the author.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@c page
@node lists fold map
@subsection Mapping


@deffn Function map* @var{proc} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax map*/stx @var{proc} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
This procedure extends the @rnrs{6} specification of @func{map} to allow
the arguments to be of unequal length; it terminates when the shortest
list runs out of elements.

@var{proc} is a procedure taking as many arguments as there are list
arguments and returning a single value.  @func{map} applies @var{proc}
element--wise to the elements of the lists and returns a list of the
results, in order.  The dynamic order in which @var{proc} is applied to
the elements of the lists is unspecified.

@example
(map* cadr '((a b)
             (d e)
             (g h)))
@result{}  (b e h)

(map* (lambda (n)
        (expt n n))
  '(1 2 3 4 5))
@result{} (1 4 27 256 3125)

(map* + '(1 2 3)
        '(4 5 6))
@result{} (5 7 9)

(let ((count 0))
  (map*
      (lambda (ignored)
        (set! count (+ count 1))
        count)
    '(a b)))
@result{} (1 2) or (2 1)
@end example

At least one of the list arguments must be a finite list:

@example
(map* +
      '(3 1 4 1)
      (circular-list 1 0))
@result{} (4 1 5 1)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function map-in-order* @var{f} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax map-in-order*/stx @var{f} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
A variant of the @func{map} procedure that guarantees to apply @var{f}
across the elements of the @var{listi} arguments in a left--to--right
order.  This is useful for mapping procedures that both have side
effects and return useful values.

At least one of the list arguments must be finite.
@end deffn


@deffn Function for-each* @var{proc} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax for-each*/stx @var{proc} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
This procedure extends the @rnrs{6} specification for @func{for-each} to
allow the arguments to be of unequal length; it terminates when the
shortest list runs out.

The arguments to @func{for-each*} are like the arguments to @func{map*},
but @func{for-each*} calls @var{proc} for its side effects rather than
for its values.  Unlike @func{map*}, @func{for-each*} is guaranteed to
call @var{proc} on the elements of the lists in order from the first
element(s) to the last, and the value returned by @func{for-each*} is
unspecified.

@example
(let ((v (make-vector 5)))
  (for-each*
       (lambda (i)
         (vector-set! v i (* i i)))
    '(0 1 2 3 4))
  v)
@result{} #(0 1 4 9 16)
@end example

At least one of the list arguments must be a finite list.
@end deffn


@defun append-map @var{f} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@defunx append-map! @var{f} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Equivalent to:

@example
(apply append (map f clist1 clist2 ...))
@end example

@noindent
and:

@example
(apply append! (map f clist1 clist2 ...))
@end example

@noindent
so it makes sense to use these functions only when the list returned by
the map process is a list of lists.

Map @var{f} over the elements of the lists, just as in the @func{map}
function.  However, the results of the applications are appended
together to make the final result.  @func{append-map} uses @func{append}
to append the results together; @func{append-map!} uses @func{append!}.

The dynamic order in which the various applications of @var{f} are made
is not specified.

Example:

@example
(append-map!
    (lambda (x)
      (list x (- x)))
  '(1 3 8))
@result{} (1 -1 3 -3 8 -8)

(append-map! list
             '(1 2 3)
             '(10 20 30))
@result{} (1 10 2 20 3 30)
@end example

At least one of the list arguments must be a finite list.
@end defun


@deffn Function map! @var{f} @var{list1} @var{list2} ...
@deffnx Syntax map!/stx @var{f} @var{list1} @var{list2} ...
Linear--update variant of @func{map}, @func{map!} is allowed, but not
required, to alter the cons cells of @var{list1} to construct the result
list.

The dynamic order in which the various applications of @var{f} are made
is not specified.  In the n--ary case, all the list arguments must have
the same number of elements.
@end deffn


@deffn Function map*! @var{f} @var{list1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax map*!/stx @var{f} @var{list1} @var{clist2} ...
Linear--update variant of @func{map}, @func{map!} is allowed, but not
required, to alter the cons cells of @var{list1} to construct the result
list.

The dynamic order in which the various applications of @var{f} are made
is not specified.  In the n--ary case, @var{clist2}, @var{clist3},
... must have at least as many elements as @var{list1}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function pair-for-each* @var{f} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax pair-for-each*/stx @var{f} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Like @func{for-each*}, but @var{f} is applied to successive sublists of
the argument lists.  That is, @var{f} is applied to the cons cells of
the lists, rather than the lists' elements.  These applications occur in
left--to--right order.

The @var{f} procedure may reliably apply @func{set-cdr!} to the pairs it
is given without altering the sequence of execution.

@example
(pair-for-each
    (lambda (pair)
      (display pair)
      (newline))
  '(a b c))
; prints
;    (a b c)
;    (b c)
;    (c)
@end example

At least one of the list arguments must be a finite list.
@end deffn


@deffn Function filter-map @var{f} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
@deffnx Syntax filter-map/stx @var{f} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Like @func{map}, but only true values are saved.

@example
(filter-map
    (lambda (x)
      (and (number? x)
           (* x x)))
  '(a 1 b 3 c 7))
@result{} (1 9 49)
@end example

The dynamic order in which the various applications of @var{f} are made
is not specified.

At least one of the list arguments must be finite.
@end deffn


@c page
@node lists filter
@section Filtering and partitioning


@cindex List filtering


@defun filter @var{pred} @var{list}
@defunx filter! @var{pred} @var{list}
Return all the elements of @var{list} that satisfy predicate @var{pred}.
The list is not disordered: elements that appear in the result list
occur in the same order as they occur in @var{list}.  The returned list
may share a common tail with @var{list}.  The dynamic order in which the
various applications of @var{pred} are made is not specified.

@example
(filter even? '(0 7 8 8 43 -4)) => (0 8 8 -4)
@end example

@func{filter!} is the linear--update variant of @func{filter}.  It is
allowed, but not required, to alter the cons cells in @var{list} to
construct the result lists.
@end defun


@defun partition @var{pred} @var{list}
@defunx partition! @var{pred} @var{list}
Partition the elements of @var{list} with predicate @var{pred}, and
return two values: the list of in--elements and the list of
out--elements.  The list is not disordered: elements occur in the result
lists in the same order as they occur in @var{list}.  The dynamic order
in which the various applications of @var{pred} are made is not
specified.  One of the returned lists may share a common tail with
@var{list}.

@example
(partition symbol? '(one 2 3 four five 6))
  => (one four five)
     (2 3 6)
@end example

@func{partition!} is the linear--update variant of @func{partition}.
It is allowed, but not required, to alter the cons cells in @var{list}
to construct the result lists.
@end defun


@defun remove* @var{pred} @var{list}
@defunx remove*! @var{pred} @var{list}
Return @var{list} without the elements that satisfy predicate
@var{pred}:

@example
(lambda (pred list)
  (filter (lambda (x)
            (not (pred x)))
          list))
@end example

The list is not disordered: elements that appear in the result list
occur in the same order as they occur in @var{list}.  The returned list
may share a common tail with @var{list}.  The dynamic order in which the
various applications of pred are made is not specified.

@example
(remove* even? '(0 7 8 8 43 -4)) => (7 43)
@end example

@func{remove*!} is the linear--update variant of @func{remove*}.  It is
allowed, but not required, to alter the cons cells in @var{list} to
construct the result lists.
@end defun


@c page
@node lists search
@section Searching


@cindex List searching
@cindex Searching in lists


The following procedures all search lists for a leftmost element
satisfying some criteria.  This means they do not always examine the
entire list; thus, there is no efficient way for them to reliably detect
and signal an error when passed a dotted or circular list.  Here are the
general rules describing how these procedures work when applied to
different kinds of lists:

@table @emph
@item proper lists
The standard, canonical behavior happens in this case.

@item dotted lists
It is an error to pass these procedures a dotted list that does not
contain an element satisfying the search criteria.  That is, it is an
error if the procedure has to search all the way to the end of the
dotted list.

However, this @srfi{} does not specify anything at all about the
behavior of these procedures when passed a dotted list containing an
element satisfying the search criteria.  It may finish successfully,
signal an error, or perform some third action.

Different implementations may provide different functionality in this
case; code which is compliant with this @srfi{} may not rely on any
particular behavior.  Future @srfi{}'s may refine @ansrfi{1} to define
specific behavior in this case.

In brief, @ansrfi{1} compliant code may not pass a dotted list argument to
these procedures.

@item circular lists
It is an error to pass these procedures a circular list that does not
contain an element satisfying the search criteria.  Note that the
procedure is not required to detect this case; it may simply diverge.
It is, however, acceptable to search a circular list if the search is
successful; that is, if the list contains an element satisfying the
search criteria.
@end table


@defun find-tail @var{pred} @var{clist}
Return the first pair of @var{clist} whose car satisfies @var{pred}.  If
no pair does, return @false{}.

@func{find-tail} can be viewed as a general--predicate variant of the
@func{member*} function.

Examples:

@example
(find-tail even? '(3 1 37 -8 -5 0 0)) => (-8 -5 0 0)
(find-tail even? '(3 1 37 -5)) => #f

;; MEMBER* X LIS:
(find-tail (lambda (elt) (equal? x elt)) lis)
@end example

In the circular--list case, this procedure ``rotates'' the list.

@func{find-tail} is essentially @func{drop-while}, where the sense of
the predicate is inverted: @func{find-tail} searches until it finds an
element satisfying the predicate; @func{drop-while} searches until it
finds an element that doesn't satisfy the predicate.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} the @func{find} defined by @rnrs{6} has an ambiguity in its
lookup semantics: if @func{find} returns @false{}, we cannot tell (in
general) if it found a @false{} element that satisfied @var{pred}, or if
it did not find any element at all.

In many situations, this ambiguity cannot arise: either the list being
searched is known not to contain any @false{} elements, or the list is
guaranteed to have an element satisfying @var{pred}.

However, in cases where this ambiguity can arise, we should use
@func{find-tail} instead of @func{find}, @func{find-tail} has no such
ambiguity.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun take-while @var{pred} @var{clist}
@defunx take-while! @var{pred} @var{clist}
Return the longest initial prefix of @var{clist} whose elements all
satisfy the predicate @var{pred}.

@func{take-while!} is the linear--update variant.  It is allowed, but
not required, to alter the argument list to produce the result.

Example:

@example
(take-while even? '(2 18 3 10 22 9)) => (2 18)
@end example
@end defun


@defun drop-while @var{pred} @var{clist}
Drops the longest initial prefix of @var{clist} whose elements all
satisfy the predicate @var{pred}, and returns the rest of the list.

Example:

@example
(drop-while even? '(2 18 3 10 22 9)) => (3 10 22 9)
@end example

The circular--list case may be viewed as ``rotating'' the list.
@end defun


@defun span @var{pred} @var{clist}
@defunx span! @var{pred} @var{list}
@defunx break @var{pred} @var{clist}
@defunx break! @var{pred} @var{list}
@func{span} splits the list into the longest initial prefix whose
elements all satisfy @var{pred}, and the remaining tail.  @func{break}
inverts the sense of the predicate: the tail commences with the first
element of the input list that satisfies the predicate.

In other words: @func{span} finds the intial span of elements satisfying
@var{pred}, and @func{break} breaks the list at the first element
satisfying @var{pred}.

@func{span} is equivalent to:

@example
(values (take-while pred clist)
        (drop-while pred clist))
@end example

@func{span!} and @func{break!} are the linear--update variants.  They
are allowed, but not required, to alter the argument list to produce the
result.

Examples:

@example
(span even? '(2 18 3 10 22 9))
  => (2 18)
     (3 10 22 9)

(break even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9))
  => (3 1)
     (4 1 5 9)
@end example
@end defun


@defun any @var{pred} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Apply the predicate across the lists, returning true if the predicate
returns true on any application.

If there are @math{n} list arguments @var{clist1} ... @var{clistn}, then
@var{pred} must be a procedure taking @math{n} arguments and returning a
boolean result.

The all the list arguments are empty: The return value is @false{}.

@func{any} applies @var{pred} to the first elements of the @var{clisti}
parameters.  If this application returns a true value, @func{any}
immediately returns that value.  Otherwise, it iterates, applying pred
to the second elements of the @var{clisti} parameters, then the third,
and so forth.  The iteration stops when a true value is produced or one
of the lists runs out of values; in the latter case, @func{any} returns
@false{}.  The application of @var{pred} to the last element of the
lists is a tail call.

Note the difference between @func{find} and @func{any}: @func{find}
returns the element that satisfied the predicate; @func{any} returns the
true value that the predicate produced.

Like @func{every}, @func{any}'s name does not end with a question mark:
this is to indicate that it does not return a simple boolean (@true{} or
@false{}), but a general value.

Examples:

@example
(any integer? '(a 3 b 2.7))   => #t
(any integer? '(a 3.1 b 2.7)) => #f
(any < '(3 1 4 1 5)
       '(2 7 1 8 2)) => #t
@end example
@end defun


@defun every @var{pred} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Apply the predicate across the lists, returning true if the predicate
returns true on every application.

If there are n list arguments @var{clist1} ... @var{clistn}, then
@var{pred} must be a procedure taking n arguments and returning a
boolean result.

The all the list arguments are empty: The return value is @true{}.

@func{every} applies @var{pred} to the first elements of the
@var{clisti} parameters.  If this application returns @false{},
@func{every} immediately returns @false{}.  Otherwise, it iterates,
applying @var{pred} to the second elements of the @var{clisti}
parameters, then the third, and so forth.  The iteration stops when a
@false{} value is produced or one of the lists runs out of values.  In
the latter case, @func{every} returns the true value produced by its
final application of @var{pred}.  The application of @var{pred} to the
last element of the lists is a tail call.

If one of the @var{clisti} has no elements, @func{every} simply returns
@true{}.

Like @func{any}, @func{every}'s name does not end with a question mark:
this is to indicate that it does not return a simple boolean (@true{} or
@false{}), but a general value.
@end defun


@defun list-index @var{pred} @var{clist1} @var{clist2} ...
Return the index of the leftmost element that satisfies @var{pred}.

If there are n list arguments, then @var{pred} must be a function taking
n arguments and returning a boolean result.

@func{list-index} applies @var{pred} to the first elements of the
@var{clisti} parameters.  If this application returns true,
@func{list-index} immediately returns zero.  Otherwise, it iterates,
applying @var{pred} to the second elements of the @var{clisti}
parameters, then the third, and so forth.  When it finds a tuple of list
elements that cause @var{pred} to return true, it stops and returns the
zero--based index of that position in the lists.

The iteration stops when one of the lists runs out of values; in this
case, @func{list-index} returns @false{}.

Examples:

@example
(list-index even? '(3 1 4 1 5 9)) => 2
(list-index < '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 5 6) '(2 7 1 8 2)) => 1
(list-index = '(3 1 4 1 5 9 2 5 6) '(2 7 1 8 2)) => #f
@end example
@end defun


@defun member* @var{x} @var{list}
@defunx member* @var{x} @var{list} @var{=}
Return the first sublist of @var{list} whose car is @var{x}, where the
sublists of list are the non--empty lists returned by @code{(drop list
i)} for @var{i} less than the length of @var{list}.  If @var{x} does not
occur in @var{list}, then @false{} is returned.

Examples:

@example
(member* '(a) '(b (a) c))
=> ((a) c)
@end example

@func{member*} extends the @rnrs{6} definition of @func{member} to allow
the client to pass in an optional equality procedure @var{=} used to
compare keys.  @var{=} defaults to @func{equal?}.

The comparison procedure is used to compare the elements @var{ei} of
list to the key @var{x} in this way:

@example
(= x ei) ; list is (E1 ... En)
@end example

@noindent
that is, the first argument is always @var{x}, and the second argument
is one of the list elements.  Thus one can reliably find the first
element of list that is greater than five with:

@example
(member* 5 list <)
@end example

Note that fully general list searching may be performed with the
@func{find-tail} and @func{find} procedures:

@example
(find-tail even? list) ; Find the first elt with an even key.
@end example
@end defun


@c page
@node lists delete
@section Deletion


@cindex List deletion


@defun delete @var{x} @var{list} [@var{=}]
@defunx delete! @var{x} @var{list} [@var{=}]
Use the comparison procedure @var{=} (which defaults to @func{equal?})
to find all elements of list that are equal to @var{x}, and delete them
from @var{list}.  The dynamic order in which the various applications of
@var{=} are made is not specified.

The list is not disordered: elements that appear in the result list
occur in the same order as they occur in the argument list.  The result
may share a common tail with the argument list.

Note that fully general element deletion can be performed with the
@func{remove} and @func{remove!} procedures:

@example
;; Delete all the even elements from LIS:
(remove even? lis)
@end example

The comparison procedure is used in this way: @code{(= x ei)}; that is,
@var{x} is always the first argument, and a list element is always the
second argument.  The comparison procedure will be used to compare each
element of list exactly once; the order in which it is applied to the
various @var{ei} is not specified.  Thus, one can reliably remove all
the numbers greater than 5 from a list with @code{(delete 5 list <)}.

@func{delete!} is the linear--update variant of @func{delete}.  It is
allowed, but not required, to alter the cons cells in its argument list
to construct the result.
@end defun


@defun delete-duplicates @var{list} [@var{=}]
@defunx {delete-duplicates!} @var{list} [@var{=}]
Remove duplicate elements from the list argument.  If there are multiple
equal elements in @var{list}, the result list only contains the first or
leftmost of these elements in the result.  The order of these surviving
elements is the same as in the original list: @func{delete-duplicates}
does not disorder the list (hence it is useful for ``cleaning up''
association lists).

The @var{=} parameter is used to compare the elements of the list; it
defaults to @func{equal?}.  If @var{x} comes before @var{y} in
@var{list}, then the comparison is performed @code{(= x y)}.  The
comparison procedure will be used to compare each pair of elements in
list no more than once; the order in which it is applied to the various
pairs is not specified.

Implementations of @func{delete-duplicates} are allowed to share common
tails between argument and result lists; for example, if the list
argument contains only unique elements, it may simply return exactly
this list.

Be aware that, in general, @func{delete-duplicates} runs in time O(n2)
for n--element lists.  Uniquifying long lists can be accomplished in O(n
lg n) time by sorting the list to bring equal elements together, then
using a linear--time algorithm to remove equal elements.  Alternatively,
one can use algorithms based on element--marking, with linear--time
results.

@func{delete-duplicates!} is the linear--update variant of
@func{delete-duplicates}; it is allowed, but not required, to alter the
cons cells in its argument list to construct the result.

@example
(delete-duplicates '(a b a c a b c z)) => (a b c z)

;; Clean up an alist:
(delete-duplicates '((a . 3) (b . 7) (a . 9) (c . 1))
                   (lambda (x y)
                     (eq? (car x) (car y))))
  => ((a . 3) (b . 7) (c . 1))
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node lists sorted
@section Utilities for sorted lists


@defun sorted-list-insert @var{item} @var{list} @var{item>}
Build a new list holding the same arguments of @var{list}, a list sorted
in increasing order, and @var{item} inserted in such a position that the
order is preserved.  The returned list may share structure with
@var{list}.

@var{item>} must be a predicate accepting two arguments and returning
true if the first is greater than the second.

If @var{item} is equal to one of the items in @var{list}: @var{item} is
added before the item from @var{list}.
@end defun


@defun sorted-list-insert/uniq @var{item} @var{list} @var{item<} @var{item>}
Like @func{sorted-list-insert}, buth if @var{item} is equal to one of
the items in @var{list}: @var{item} is discarded, and @var{list} it self
is returned.
@end defun


@defun union-of-sorted-lists @var{list1} @var{list2} @var{item<} @var{item>}
Build a new list representing the union of the lists arguments.
@var{list1} and @var{list2} are interpreted as lists sorted in
increasing order, and the result of the union is a sorted list.  The
returned list may share structure with the list arguments.

@var{item<} and @var{item>} must be predicates accepting two arguments
and returning true if the first is less than/greater than the second.

When both @var{item<} and @var{item>} return @false{}, the two items are
considered equal; in this case all the equal items are added to the
result, in such a way that the items from @var{list1} all come before
the items from @var{list2}.
@end defun


@defun union-of-sorted-lists/uniq @var{list1} @var{list2} @var{item<} @var{item>}
Like @func{union-of-sorted-lists}, but when equal items are found only
the ones from @var{list1} are added to the result.  Examples:

@example
(union-of-sorted-lists/uniq
  '(0 1   3     8 9 10)
  '(  1 2   4 5        11 23)
  < >)
@result{} '(0 1 2 3 4 5 8 9 10 11 23)
;;     ^
;; from list1

(union-of-sorted-lists/uniq
  '(0 1 1   3)
  '(  1   2   4)
  < >)
@result{} '(0 1 1 2 3 4 5)
;;     ^ ^
;; both from list1
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node lists alist
@section Association lists


@cindex List, association lists
@cindex Association lists
@cindex Alists


An ``association list'' (or ``alist'') is a list of pairs.  The car of
each pair contains a key value, and the cdr contains the associated data
value.  They can be used to construct simple look--up tables in Scheme.
Note that association lists are probably inappropriate for
performance--critical use on large data; in these cases, hash tables or
some other alternative should be employed.


@defun assoc* @var{key} @var{alist} [@var{=}]
@defunx assq @var{key} @var{alist}
@defunx assv @var{key} @var{alist}
@var{alist} must be an association list: a list of pairs.  These
procedures find the first pair in @var{alist} whose car field is
@var{key}, and returns that pair.  If no pair in @var{alist} has
@var{key} as its car, then @false{} is returned.

@func{assq} uses @func{eq?} to compare @var{key} with the car fields of
the pairs in @var{alist}, while @func{assv} uses @func{eqv?} and
@func{assoc*} uses @func{equal?}.

Example:

@example
(define e '((a 1) (b 2) (c 3)))
(assq 'a e)                            =>  (a 1)
(assq 'b e)                            =>  (b 2)
(assq 'd e)                            =>  #f
(assq (list 'a) '(((a)) ((b)) ((c))))  =>  #f
(assoc (list 'a) '(((a)) ((b)) ((c)))) =>  ((a))
(assq 5 '((2 3) (5 7) (11 13)))    =>  *unspecified*
(assv 5 '((2 3) (5 7) (11 13)))    =>  (5 7)
@end example

@func{assoc*} allows the client to pass in an optional equality
procedure @var{=} used to compare keys.

The comparison procedure is used to compare the elements @var{ei} of
list to the key parameter in this way:

@example
(= key (car ei)) ; list is (E1 ... En)
@end example

@noindent
that is, the first argument is always @var{key}, and the second argument
is one of the list elements.  Thus one can reliably find the first entry
of @var{alist} whose @var{key} is greater than five with @code{(assoc* 5
alist <)}.

Note that fully general alist searching may be performed with the
@func{find-tail} and @func{find} procedures:

@example
;; Look up the first association in alist with an even key:
(find (lambda (a)
        (even? (car a)))
      alist)
@end example
@end defun


@defun alist-cons @var{key} @var{datum} @var{alist}
Defined as:

@example
(lambda (key datum alist)
  (cons (cons key datum) alist))
@end example

Cons a new alist entry mapping @var{key} to @var{datum} onto
@var{alist}.
@end defun


@defun alist-copy @var{alist}
Make a fresh copy of @var{alist}.  This means copying each pair that
forms an association as well as the spine of the list:

@example
(lambda (a)
  (map (lambda (elt)
         (cons (car elt) (cdr elt)))
       a))
@end example
@end defun


@defun alist-delete @var{key} @var{alist} [@var{=}]
@defunx alist-delete! @var{key} @var{alist} [@var{=}]
Delete all associations from @var{alist} with the given @var{key}, using
the key-comparison procedure @var{=}, which defaults to @func{equal?}.
The dynamic order in which the various applications of @var{=} are made
is not specified.

Return values may share common tails with the @var{alist} argument.  The
alist is not disordered: elements that appear in the result alist occur
in the same order as they occur in @var{alist}.

The comparison procedure is used to compare the element keys @var{ki} of
@var{alist}'s entries to the key parameter in this way: @code{(= key
ki)}.  Thus, one can reliably remove all entries of @var{alist} whose
key is greater than five with @code{(alist-delete 5 alist <)}.

@func{alist-delete!} is the linear--update variant of
@func{alist-delete}; it is allowed, but not required, to alter cons
cells from the alist parameter to construct the result.
@end defun

@c page
@node lists circ
@section Circular lists


@subsubheading Constructors

@deffn Function circular-list @vari{obj} @varii{obj} ...
@deffnx Syntax circular-list/stx @vari{obj} @varii{obj} ...
Construct a circular list of the elements.

@example
(circular-list 'z 'q) @result{} (z q z q z q ...)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function list->circular-list! @var{list}
@deffnx Syntax list->circular-list!/stx @var{list}
Take a proper list and make it circular.  Return the circular list.
@end deffn


@deffn Function circular-list->list! @var{clist}
@deffnx Function circular-list->list!/stx @var{clist}
Take a circular list and ``open it'' returning a proper list.  The car
of the returned list is the car of @var{clist}.  If @var{clist} is null,
return null.
@end deffn


@deffn Function circular-list-copy @var{clist}
@deffnx Syntax circular-list-copy/stx @var{clist}
Build and return a copy of @var{clist}.  If @var{clist} is null, return
null.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Inspection

@deffn Function circular-list-length @var{clist}
@deffnx Syntax circular-list-length/stx @var{clist}
Return the number of elements in @var{clist}.  The length of a circular
list is a non--negative exact integer @math{n} such that: @func{cdr}
applied @math{n} times to @var{clist}, returns the @var{clist} pair
itself.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Comparison

@deffn Function circular-list= @var{=} @vari{clist} ...
@deffnx Function circular-list=/stx @var{=} @vari{clist} @varii{clist}
Compare the list arguments using @var{=}, return true if the lists are
equal.  If all the list arguments are null, return @true{}.  If at least
one list arguments i null, but not all, return @false{}.  If the list
arguments have different length, return @false{}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node lists set
@section Set operations on lists


@cindex List set operations
@cindex Set operations on lists


These procedures implement operations on sets represented as lists of
elements.  They all take an @var{=} argument used to compare elements of
lists.  This equality procedure is required to be consistent with
@func{eq?}.  That is, it must be the case that:

@example
(eq? x y) => (= x y)
@end example

Note that this implies, in turn, that two lists that are @func{eq?} are
also set--equal by any legal comparison procedure.  This allows for
constant--time determination of set operations on @func{eq?} lists.

Be aware that these procedures typically run in time O(n * m) for n--
and m--element list arguments.  Performance--critical applications
operating upon large sets will probably wish to use other data
structures and algorithms.


@defun lset<=? @var{=} @var{list1} ...
Return true if, and only if, every @var{listi} is a subset of
@var{listi+1}, using @var{=} for the element--equality procedure.  List
@var{AL} is a subset of list @var{BL} if every element in @var{AL} is
equal to some element of @var{BL}.  When performing an element
comparison, the @var{=} procedure's first argument is an element of
@var{AL}, its second argument an element of @var{BL}.

Examples:

@example
(lset<=? eq? '(a) '(a b a) '(a b c c)) => #t

(lset<=? eq?) => #t             ; Trivial cases
(lset<=? eq? '(a)) => #t
@end example

If invoked with all null lists, the return value is @true{}.
@end defun


@defun lset=? @var{=} @var{list1} @var{list2} ...
Return true if, and only if, every @var{listi} is set--equal to
@var{listi+1}, using @var{=} for the element--equality procedure.
``Set--equal'' simply means that @var{listi} is a subset of
@var{listi+1}, and @var{listi+1} is a subset of @var{listi}.  The
@var{=} procedure's first argument is an element of @var{listi}, its
second argument is an element of @var{listi+1}.

Examples:

@example
(lset=? eq? '(b e a) '(a e b) '(e e b a)) => #t

(lset=? eq?) => #t               ; Trivial cases
(lset=? eq? '(a)) => #t
@end example
@end defun


@defun lset-adjoin @var{=} @var{list} @var{elt1} ...
Add the @var{elti} elements not already in the @var{list} parameter to
the result list.  The result shares a common tail with the @var{list}
parameter.  The new elements are added to the front of the list, but no
guarantees are made about their order.  The @var{=} parameter is an
equality procedure used to determine if an elti is already a member of
list.  Its first argument is an element of @var{list}, its second is one
of the @var{elti}.

The @var{list} parameter is always a suffix of the result; even if the
list parameter contains repeated elements, these are not reduced.

Example:

@example
(lset-adjoin eq? '(a b c d c e) 'a 'e 'i 'o 'u)
  => (u o i a b c d c e)
@end example
@end defun


@defun lset-union @var{=} @var{list1} ...
@defunx lset-union! @var{=} @var{list1} ...
Return the union of the lists, using @var{=} for the element--equality
procedure.

The union of lists @var{AL} and @var{BL} is constructed as follows:

@enumerate
@item
If @var{AL} is the empty list, the answer is @var{BL} (or a copy of
@var{BL}).

@item
Otherwise, the result is initialised to be list @var{AL} (or a copy of
@var{AL}).

@item
Proceed through the elements of list @var{BL} in a left--to--right
order.  If @var{b} is such an element of @var{BL}, compare every element
@var{r} of the current result list to @var{b}: @code{(= r b)}.  If all
comparisons fail, @var{b} is consed onto the front of the result.
@end enumerate

However, there is no guarantee that @var{=} will be applied to every
pair of arguments from @var{AL} and @var{BL}.  In particular, if
@var{AL} is @func{eq?} to @var{BL}, the operation may immediately
terminate.

In the n--ary case, the two--argument @func{list-union} operation is
simply folded across the argument lists.

Examples:

@example
(lset-union eq? '(a b c d e) '(a e i o u))
  => (u o i a b c d e)

;; Repeated elements in LIST1 are preserved.
(lset-union eq? '(a a c) '(x a x)) => (x a a c)

;; Trivial cases
(lset-union eq?) => ()
(lset-union eq? '(a b c)) => (a b c)
@end example

@func{lset-union!} is the linear--update variant of @func{lset-union}.
It is allowed, but not required, to use the cons cells in the first list
parameter to construct its answer.  @func{lset-union!} is permitted to
recycle cons cells from any of its list arguments.
@end defun


@defun lset-intersection @var{=} @var{list1} @var{list2} ...
@defunx lset-intersection! @var{=} @var{list1} ...
Return the intersection of the lists, using @var{=} for the
element--equality procedure.

The intersection of lists @var{AL} and @var{BL} is comprised of every
element of @var{AL} that is @var{=} to some element of @var{BL}:
@code{(= a b)}, for @var{a} in @var{AL}, and @var{b} in @var{BL}.  Note
this implies that an element which appears in @var{BL} and multiple
times in list @var{AL} will also appear multiple times in the result.

The order in which elements appear in the result is the same as they
appear in @var{list1}; that is, @func{lset-intersection} essentially
filters @var{list1}, without disarranging element order.  The result may
share a common tail with @var{list1}.

In the n--ary case, the two--argument @func{list-intersection} operation
is simply folded across the argument lists.  However, the dynamic order
in which the applications of @var{=} are made is not specified.  The
procedure may check an element of @var{list1} for membership in every
other list before proceeding to consider the next element of
@var{list1}, or it may completely intersect @var{list1} and @var{list2}
before proceeding to @var{list3}, or it may go about its work in some
third order.

Examples:

@example
(lset-intersection eq? '(a b c d e) '(a e i o u))
  => (a e)

;; Repeated elements in LIST1 are preserved.
(lset-intersection eq? '(a x y a) '(x a x z))
  => '(a x a)

(lset-intersection eq? '(a b c))        ; Trivial case
  => (a b c)
@end example

@func{lset-intersection!} is the linear--update variant of
@func{lset-intersection}.  It is allowed, but not required, to use the
cons cells in the first list parameter to construct its answer.
@end defun


@defun lset-difference @var{=} @var{list1} @var{list2} ...
@defunx lset-difference! @var{=} @var{list1} ...
Return the difference of the lists, using @var{=} for the
element--equality procedure: all the elements of @var{list1} that are
not @var{=} to any element from one of the other @var{listi} parameters.

The @var{=} procedure's first argument is always an element of
@var{list1}; its second is an element of one of the other @var{listi}.
Elements that are repeated multiple times in the @var{list1} parameter
will occur multiple times in the result.

The order in which elements appear in the result is the same as they
appear in @var{list1}; that is, @func{lset-difference} essentially
filters @var{list1}, without disarranging element order.  The result may
share a common tail with @var{list1}.

The dynamic order in which the applications of @var{=} are made is not
specified.  The procedure may check an element of @var{list1} for
membership in every other list before proceeding to consider the next
element of @var{list1}, or it may completely compute the difference of
@var{list1} and @var{list2} before proceeding to @var{list3}, or it may
go about its work in some third order.

@example
(lset-difference eq? '(a b c d e) '(a e i o u))
  => (b c d)

(lset-difference eq? '(a b c))   ; Trivial case
  => (a b c)
@end example

@func{lset-difference!} is the linear--update variant of
@func{lset-difference}.  It is allowed, but not required, to use the
cons cells in the first list parameter to construct its answer.
@end defun


@defun lset-xor @var{=} @var{list1} ...
@defunx lset-xor! @var{=} @var{list1} ...
Return the exclusive--or of the sets, using @var{=} for the
element--equality procedure.  If there are exactly two lists, this is
all the elements that appear in exactly one of the two lists.  The
operation is associative, and thus extends to the n--ary case, in which
the result is a list of the elements that appear in an odd number of the
lists.  The result may share a common tail with any of the @var{listi}
parameters.

More precisely, for two lists @var{AL} and @var{BL}, @var{AL} xor
@var{BL} is a list of:

@itemize
@item
every element @var{a} of @var{AL} such that there is no element @var{b}
of @var{BL} such that @code{(= a b)}, and

@item
every element @var{b} of @var{BL} such that there is no element @var{a}
of @var{AL} such that @code{(= b a)}.
@end itemize

However, an implementation is allowed to assume that @var{=} is
symmetric; that is, that @code{(= a b) => (= b a)}.

This means, for example, that if a comparison @code{(= a b)} produces
true for some @var{a} in @var{AL} and @var{b} in @var{BL}, both @var{a}
and @var{b} may be removed from inclusion in the result.

In the n--ary case, the binary--xor operation is simply folded across
the lists.

Examples:

@example
(lset-xor eq? '(a b c d e) '(a e i o u))
  => (d c b i o u)

;; Trivial cases.
(lset-xor eq?) => ()
(lset-xor eq? '(a b c d e)) => (a b c d e)
@end example

@func{lset-xor!} is the linear--update variant of @func{lset-xor}.  It
is allowed, but not required, to use the cons cells in the first list
parameter to construct its answer.
@end defun


@defun {lset-diff+intersection} @var{=} @var{list1} @var{list2} ...
@defunx {lset-diff+intersection!} @var{=} @var{list1} @var{list2} ...
Return two values: the difference and the intersection of the lists.  It
is equivalent to:

@example
(values (lset-difference = list1 list2 ...)
        (lset-intersection = list1
                             (lset-union = list2 ...)))
@end example

@noindent
but can be implemented more efficiently.

The @var{=} procedure's first argument is an element of @var{list1}; its
second is an element of one of the other @var{listi}.

Either of the answer lists may share a common tail with @var{list1}.
This operation essentially partitions @var{list1}.

@func{lset-diff+intersection!} is the linear--update variant of
@func{lset-diff+intersection}.  It is allowed, but not required, to use
the cons cells in the first list parameter to construct its answer.
@end defun

@c page
@node lists low
@section Low level utilities


The following bindings are exported by @library{lists low}.


@defun %and/or-null? @var{list} ...
This is the implementation of @func{and/or-null?}.  Return two values
being the return values of @func{and-null?} and @func{or-null?} applied
to the @var{list} arguments.
@end defun


@defun %and/or-eq? @var{list-of-clists1} @var{list-of-clists2}
Given two lists of lists (possibly circular), compare with @func{eq?}
the sublists from the arguments, and return two boolean values:

@enumerate
@item
True if each sublist from @var{list-of-clists1} is @func{eq?} to its
homologous from @var{list-of-clists2}.

@item
True if at least one sublist from @var{list-of-clists1} is @func{eq?} to
its homologous from @var{list-of-clists2}.
@end enumerate

@var{list-of-clists1} and @var{list-of-clists2} are meant to have the
same length, but this is not tested.  The iteration will stop when the
end of the shorter list is found.

To understand how this function is used, consider the following:

@smallexample
(define (circular-list= item= . list-of-clists)
  (let-values (((and-nil or-nil)
               (apply %and/or-null? list-of-clists)))
    (cond (and-nil #t)
          (or-nil  #f)
          (else
           (let loop ((cells list-of-clists))
             (let-values (((cars cdrs) (%cars/cdrs* cells)))
               (or
                (null? cars)
                (and
                 (apply item= cars)
                 (let-values (((and-eq or-eq)
                              (%and/or-eq? list-of-clists cdrs)))
                   (cond (and-eq #t)
                         (or-eq  #f)
                         (else (loop cdrs))))))))))))
@end smallexample
@end defun


@defun %cars @var{list-of-lists}
@defunx %cars @var{list-of-lists} @var{who}
Return the list of cars of the sublists of @var{list-of-lists}, which
must be a non--empty list of lists.

If all the sublists are null: The return value is null.  If at least one
sublist, but not all, is null: Raise an assertion violation using
@var{who} as value for the @samp{&who} condition.  @var{who} defaults to
@false{}.
@end defun


@defun %cars* @var{list-of-lists}
Like @var{%cars} but accept sublists of different length.  If at least
one sublist is null: The return value is null.
@end defun


@defun %cdrs @var{list-of-lists}
@defunx %cdrs @var{list-of-lists} @var{who}
Return the list of cdrs of the sublists of @var{list-of-lists}, which
must be a non--empty list of lists.

If all the sublists are null: The return value is null.  If at least one
sublist, but not all, is null: Raise an assertion violation using
@var{who} as value for the @samp{&who} condition.  @var{who} defaults to
@false{}.
@end defun


@defun %cdrs* @var{list-of-lists}
Like @var{%cdrs} but accept sublists of different length.  If at least
one sublist is null: The return value is null.
@end defun


@defun %cars/cdrs @var{list-of-lists}
Given a list of sublists, return two values being the list of cars and
the list of cdrs from @var{list-of-lists}.  If the sublists are detected

not to have equal length, raise an error.
@end defun


@defun %cars/cdrs* @var{list-of-lists}
Like @func{%cars/cdrs}, but accept lists of different length.  If a list
in @var{list-of-lists} is null: Return 2 null values.
@end defun


@defun %cars+cdrs*/no-test @var{list-of-lists}
Like @func{%cars/cdrs*}, but do not test if one sublist is null.  If one
sublist is null, the behaviour is undefined.
@end defun


@defun %cars+knil @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil}
@defunx %knil+cars @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil}
@defunx %cars+knil @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil} @var{who}
@defunx %knil+cars @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil} @var{who}
Return the list of cars of the sublists of @var{list-of-lists}, which
must be a non--empty list of lists.  @func{%cars+knil} adds @var{knil}
as last value.  @func{%knil+cars} adds @var{knil} as first value.

If all the sublists are null: The return value is null.  If at least one
sublist, but not all, is null: Raise an assertion violation using
@var{who} as value for the @samp{&who} condition.  @var{who} defaults to
@false{}.
@end defun


@defun %cars+knil* @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil}
@defunx %knil+cars* @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil}
Like @func{%cars+knil} and @func{%knil+cars}, but accept sublists of
different length.  If at least one sublist is null: The return value is
null.
@end defun


@defun %cars+knil/cdrs @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil}
@defunx %knil+cars/cdrs @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil}
@defunx %cars+knil/cdrs @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil} @var{who}
@defunx %knil+cars/cdrs @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil} @var{who}
Given that @var{list-of-lists} must be a non--empty list of lists,
return two values: The list of cars and the lists of cdrs of the
sublists.  @func{%cars+knil/cdrs} adds @var{knil} as last value of the
cars.  @func{%knil+cars/cdrs} adds @var{knil} as first value of the
cars.

If all the sublists are null: The return values are both null.  If at
least one sublist, but not all, is null: Raise an assertion violation
using @var{who} as value for the @samp{&who} condition.  @var{who}
defaults to @false{}.
@end defun


@defun %cars+knil/cdrs* @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil}
@defunx %knil+cars/cdrs* @var{list-of-lists} @var{knil}
Like @func{%cars+knil/cdrs} and @func{%knil+cars/cdrs}, but accept
sublists of different length.  If at least one sublist is null: The
return value is null.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Queues

The following macros handle queue values: Pairs whose car is a list and
whose cdr is the last pair in the list.  They allow user friendly
insertion of elements at the end of the list.  Experiments show that
building a list in reverse and then applying @func{reverse} to it, is
almost always faster than using these queue macros.

@example
          -----------
  queue  | car | cdr |
          -----------
            |     |
        ----       ----------------
       |                           |
       v                           v
      ---    ---    ---    ---    ---
list | | |->| | |->| | |->| | |->| | |->()
      ---    ---    ---    ---    ---
      |      |      |      |      |
      o      o      o      o      o
@end example

The following @api{} does not implement a full queue value; for that see
the @library{queues} library.  @ref{queues, Simple queues}


@deffn Syntax %make-queue @var{obj}
Build and return a new queue having @var{obj} as first argument.  Takes
care of evaluating @var{obj} only once.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax %list->queue @var{ell}
Embed @var{list} into a queue and return it.  Takes care of evaluating
@var{ell} only once.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax enqueue! @var{queue} @var{obj}
Enqueue @var{obj} at the end of @var{queue} and return a new queue
value.  Takes care of evaluating @var{obj} only once, but evaluates
@var{queue} multiple times.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax %queue-list-ref @var{queue}
Return the list inside of @var{queue}.  It is a synonym of @func{car}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax %queue-last-pair-ref @var{queue}
Return the last pair of the list inside of @var{queue}.  It is a synonym
of @func{cdr}.
@end deffn


Examples of building a list using a queue:

@example
(define max-value+1 10)

(do ((i 1 (+ 1 i))
     (l (%make-queue 0) (%enqueue! l i)))
    ((= i max-value+1)
     (%queue-list-ref l)))
@result{} '(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9)

(let loop ((l (%make-queue 0))
           (i 1))
  (if (= i max-value+1)
      (%queue-list-ref l)
    (loop (%enqueue! l i) (+ 1 i))))
@result{} '(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9)
@end example

@noindent
which is the same of doing:

@example
(define max-value+1 10)

(do ((i 1 (+ 1 i))
     (l '(0) (cons i l)))
    ((= i max-value+1)
     (reverse l)))
@result{} '(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9)

(let loop ((l '(0))
           (i 1))
  (if (= i max-value+1)
      (reverse l)
    (loop (cons i l) (+ 1 i))))
@result{} '(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9)
@end example

@c page
@node char-sets
@chapter Character sets


The @library{char-sets} library handles sets of characters.

A ``character'' is every value for which the application of @func{char?}
returns @true{}.  This library does nothing that can be related to a
specific character encoding, like @ascii{}, @acronym{UCS} or Unicode.
When needed, it relies on @func{string->list} to split a string into its
character components.  @ref{stdlib unicode,Unicode}.

@menu
* char-sets intro::             Introduction.
* char-sets make::              Constructors.
* char-sets pred::              Predicates.
* char-sets inspect::           Inspection.
* char-sets ops::               Operations.
* char-sets sets::              Predefined character sets.
@end menu

@c page
@node char-sets intro
@section Introduction


In the following procedure specifications:

@table @var
@item cs
Is a character set.

@item str
Is a string.

@item char
Is a character.

@item range
Is a pair of characters interpreted as double--closed range of
characters, the car being the lower--limit and the cdr being the
upper--limit.

@item char-list
Is a list of characters.

@item pred
Is a unary character predicate procedure, returning a boolean value when
applied to a character.

@item obj
May be any value at all.
@end table

A parameter followed by @code{...} means zero--or--more elements.

Unless otherwise noted in the specification of a procedure, procedures
always return character sets that are distinct from the parameter
character sets.

@c page
@node char-sets make
@section Constructors


@defvar char-set-lower-bound
@defvarx char-set-upper-bound
@defvarx char-set-inner-upper-bound
@defvarx char-set-inner-lower-bound
The character sets are defined by the Scheme standard to be in the
ranges @code{[0, #xD800)} and @code{(#xDFFF, #x10FFFF]}.
@library{char-sets} exports these symbols, defined as follows:

@example
(define char-set-lower-bound
  (integer->char 0))

(define char-set-inner-upper-bound
  (integer->char (- #xD800 1)))

(define char-set-inner-lower-bound
  (integer->char (+ 1 #xDFFF)))

(define char-set-upper-bound
  (integer->char #x10FFFF))
@end example
@end defvar


@defun char-set @var{char/range} ...
Build and return a new char-set.  The @var{char/range} arguments may be
the empty list or a mixed list of characters and ranges.
@end defun


@defun char-set-copy @var{cs}
Return a newly allocated char-set holding a copy of @var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-add @var{cs} @var{char/range}
@defunx char-set-add! @var{cs} @var{char/range}
Add values to an existing char-set.  @var{char/range} can be a single
character or a range.  @func{char-set-add} returns a new char-set,
@func{char-set-add!}  modifies @var{cs} itself.

The returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun

@c page
@node char-sets pred
@section Predicates


@defun char-set? @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a valid char-set.
@end defun


@defun char-set-empty? @var{cs}
Return true if the char-set is empty.
@end defun


@defun char-set-contains? @var{cs} @var{char}
Return true if @var{char} is an element of @var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set=? @var{cs-a} @var{cs-b}
Return true if the arguments represent the same char-set.
@end defun


@defun char-set<? @var{cs-a} @var{cs-b}
Return true if all the elements of @var{cs-a} are strictly less than all
the elements of @var{cs-b}.  Empty sets cannot be ordered, so if an
argument is empty the return value is @false{}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-subset? @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-subset?/strict @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
Return @true{} if the arguments, in the given order, are subsets of each
other or strict subsets of each other.
@end defun


@defun char-set-superset? @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-superset?/strict @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
Return @true{} if the arguments, in the given order, are supersets of
each other or strict supersets of each other.
@end defun

@c page
@node char-sets inspect
@section Inspection


@defun char-set-size @var{cs}
Return the number of characters in @var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-write @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-write @var{cs} @var{port}
Write to @var{port} a chunk of Scheme code that, when evaluated,
generates @var{cs}.  When not given, @var{port} defaults to
@code{(current-output-port)}.
@end defun


@c page
@node char-sets ops
@section Operations


@defun char-set-intersection @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
Return a new set representing the intersection of the arguments; the
intersection is the set of characters present in all the arguments.

The returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun char-set-union @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
Return a new set representing the union of the arguments; the union is
the set of characters present in one and/or more arguments.

The returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun char-set-difference @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
Return a new set representing the difference between the arguments; the
difference is the set of characters present in only one of the
arguments.

The returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun char-set-complement @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-complement @var{cs} @var{cs-universe}
Return a new set representing the complement of @var{cs} in
@var{cs-universe}.  The complement is the set of characters present in
@var{cs-universe}, which are not present in @var{cs}.

If omitted, @var{cs-universe} defaults to @code{char-set:full}.

The returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun char-set-for-each @var{proc} @var{cs}
Apply @var{proc} to each character in @var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-every @var{proc} @var{cs}
Apply @var{proc} to each character in the set and return true if all the
return values are true.  The application stops at the first @false{}
return value.
@end defun


@defun char-set-any @var{proc} @var{cs}
Apply @var{proc} to each character in the set and return true if at
least one of the returned values is true.  The application stops at the
first true return value.
@end defun


@defun char-set-fold @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{cs}
Fold @var{kons} over the characters in the set.  @var{kons} must accept
two arguments: The next character from the set and the return value of
the previous invocation of @var{kons}.  At the first application the
second argument to @var{kons} is @var{knil}.
@end defun


@defun char-set->list @var{cs}
Return a list holding all the characters in the set.  Beware that for
some character sets the resulting list can be big.
@end defun


@defun string->char-set @var{string}
Return a new character set holding all the characters in @var{string}.
@end defun

@c page
@node char-sets sets
@section Predefined character sets


Several character sets are predefined for convenience by
@library{char-sets} and other auxiliary libraries.  They are meant to
satisfy the simplest needs.

@menu
* char-sets sets intro::        Introduction.
* char-sets sets how::          How predefined sets were defined.
* char-sets sets basic::        Basic character sets.
* char-sets sets ascii::        Sets of @ascii{} characters.
* char-sets sets blocks::       Sets corresponding to Unicode blocks.
* char-sets sets categories::   Sets corresponding to Unicode general
                                categories.
@end menu

@c page
@node char-sets sets intro
@subsection Introduction


Unicode assigns a single number to each code element defined by the
Standard.  Each of these numbers is called a @dfn{code point} and, when
referred to in text, is listed in hexadecimal form following the prefix
@code{U+}.  For example, the code point @code{U+0041} is the hexadecimal
number @code{0041} (equal to the decimal number @code{65}); it
represents the character @code{A} in the Unicode Standard.

Each character is also assigned a unique name that specifies it and no
other.  For example, @code{U+0041} is assigned the character name
@code{LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A}.  @code{U+0A1B} is assigned the character
name @code{GURMUKHI LETTER CHA}.  These Unicode names are identical to
the @acronym{ISO}/@acronym{IEC} 10646 names for the same characters.

For a general overview of the Unicode Standard see@footnote{@aurl{} last
verified Tue Jun 23, 2009.}:

@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode}

For the complete reference of Unicode code points we should inspect the
Unicode Characters Database@footnote{@aurl{}s last verified Tue Jun 23,
2009.}:

@center @url{ftp://ftp.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/UnicodeData.txt}
@center @url{ftp://ftp.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/Blocks.txt}

@noindent
which is partly and introductorily documented by@footnote{@aurl{} last
verified Tue Jun 23, 2009.}:

@center @url{ftp://ftp.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/UCD.html}

@noindent
the same directory on the @url{unicode.org} site offers other documents
on the interpretation of the database.

For an explanation of @ascii{} coding, see@footnote{@aurl{} last
verified Tue Jun 23, 2009.}:

@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ascii}

@c page
@node char-sets sets how
@subsection How predefined sets were defined


The following methods were employed to define the character sets.

@itemize
@item
The @ascii{}--related sets were composed by hand reading the @ascii{}
description; they are exported by the @library{char-sets} library
itself.

@item
All the ranges defined by the @file{Blocks.txt} database file have been
converted to a set by hand; they are exported by the @library{char-sets
blocks} library (there are a lot of them).

@item
Each general category (@code{Ll}, @code{Lu}, etc.) has been converted to
a set; they are exported by the @library{char-sets categories} library
(there are a lot of them).  Notice that not all the code points accepted
by @func{char=?} are part of a general category, so the union of the
category sets is different from the full character set.
@end itemize

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Inspecting the database

On a Unix--like system, the following commands can be used to inspect
the @file{UnicodeData.txt} database:

@table @command
@item wc -l <UnicodeData.txt
Count the lines in the database: One line for each code point.  Notice
that not all the code points have a line in this file; the file format
allows ranges, so some pairs of lines represent ranges of characters.

@item cut -d';' -f3 <UnicodeData.txt | sort | uniq
Print the category codes in the database (use @command{sort} first,
because @command{uniq} removes repeated lines only if they are
adjacent).  Notice that the @code{Cs} category (surrogate characters) is
present in the database, but excluded from the Nausicaa libraries,
because it describes the range @code{[#xD800, #xDFFF]} forbidden by
@rnrs{6}.

@item grep ';Cs;' <UnicodeData.txt
Print only the lines describing the surrogate characters.  They are six
lines representing the three ranges:

@table @code
@item [#xD800, #xDB7F]
Non private use high surrogate.

@item [#xDB80, #xDBFF]
Private use high surrogate.

@item [#xDC00, #xDFFF]
Low surrogate.
@end table

@noindent
Notice that these ranges are adjacent and their union is the range
@code{[#xD800, #xDFFF]}.

@item grep -v ';Cs;' <UnicodeData.txt | wc -l
Count the lines excluding the surrogate characters.  The count should be
@math{19330} (last verified with the database downloaded Wed Jun 23,
2009).

@item grep ';Ll;' <UnicodeData.txt
Extract all the lines describing the @code{Ll} category.

@item grep ', *\(First\|Last\)>' <UnicodeData.txt
Extract all the lines describing the inclusive limit of a range of
characters.

@item grep -v ', *\(First\|Last\)>' <UnicodeData.txt
Extract all the lines describing a single code point, excluding the
lines describing the limit of a range of characters.
@end table

The following Bourne shell script processes the @file{UnicodeData.txt}
database and prints a Scheme program that, when evaluated, prints the
definitions of category character sets.  The output script program makes
use of the @library{char-sets} library itself.

@smallexample
# unicode-database-extract-category-code-points.sh --
#

DATABASE=$@{1:?'missing UnicodeData.txt pathname'@}

CATEGORY_CODES=$(cut -d';' -f3 <"$DATABASE" | sort | uniq | grep -v Cs)

echo '(import (rnrs) (char-sets))'

for CATEGORY in $CATEGORY_CODES
do
    echo processing category $CATEGORY >&2
    echo -n "(define category-$CATEGORY (quote ("
    @{
        grep ";$CATEGORY;" <"$DATABASE"   | \
            grep -v ', *\(First\|Last\)>' | \
            cut -d';' -f1                 | \
            while read
        do echo -n "#\x$REPLY "
        done

        grep ";$CATEGORY;" <"$DATABASE"   | \
            grep ', *\(First\|Last\)>'    | \
            cut -d';' -f1                 | \
            while read
        do
            FIRST=$REPLY
            read
            LAST=$REPLY
            echo -n "(#\x$FIRST . #\x$LAST) "
        done
    @}
    echo ')))'
    echo "(display \"(define char-set:category/$CATEGORY\")(newline)"
    echo "(char-set-write (apply char-set category-$CATEGORY))(newline)"
    echo '(display ")")(newline)'
    echo
done

### end of file
@end smallexample

@noindent
For example, the output for the @code{Co} category, which has only
ranges, is (reformatted to look human readable):

@example
(define category-Co (quote ((#\xE000 . #\xF8FF)
                            (#\xF0000 . #\xFFFFD)
                            (#\x100000 . #\x10FFFD))))

(display "(define char-set:category/Co")
(newline)
(char-set-write (apply char-set category-Co))
(newline)
(display ")")
(newline)
@end example

@c page
@node char-sets sets basic
@subsection Basic character sets


The following character sets are defined and exported by the
@library{char-sets} library.


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:full
Contains all the characters recognised by the @rnrs{6} standard.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:empty
The empty set.
@end defvr

@c page
@node char-sets sets ascii
@subsection Sets of @ascii{} characters


The following character sets are defined and exported by the
@library{char-sets} library.


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii
All the characters in the @ascii{} set.  It is the set of all the
characters whose numeric code is between 0 and 127, both included.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/lower-case
All the lower--case letters between @code{#\a} and @code{#\z}, included.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/upper-case
All the upper--case letters between @code{#\A} and @code{#\Z}, included.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/letter
All the letters: It is the union of @code{char-set:ascii/lower-case} and
@code{char-set:ascii/upper-case}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/digit
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/dec-digit
All the decimal digits:

@example
#\0 #\1 #\2 #\3 #\4 #\5 #\6 #\7 #\8 #\9
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/oct-digit
All the octal digits:

@example
#\0 #\1 #\2 #\3 #\4 #\5 #\6 #\7
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/hex-digit
All the hexadecimal digits:

@example
#\0 #\1 #\2 #\3 #\4 #\5 #\6 #\7 #\8 #\9
#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f
#\A #\B #\C #\D #\E #\F
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/letter+digit
All the letters and decimal digits: It is the union of
@code{char-set:ascii/letter} and @code{char-set:ascii/dec-digit}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/punctuation
All the punctuation characters whose numeric code is in the range
@math{[0, 127]}:

@c Yes I have verified that all of these have numeric code in the range
@c [0, 127] (Marco Maggi, Tue Jun 23, 2009).
@example
@c Keep two spaces between the characters.  Also keep an empty line
@c between them.
#\!  #\"  #\#  #\%  #\&  #\'  #\(  #\)  #\*  #\,  #\-  #\.

#\/  #\:  #\;  #\?  #\@@  #\[  #\\  #\]  #\_  #\@{  #\@}
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/symbol
All the symbol characters whose numeric code is in the range @math{[0,
127]}:

@c Yes I have verified that all of these have numeric code in the range
@c [0, 127] (Marco Maggi, Tue Jun 23, 2009).
@example
@c Keep two spaces between the characters.
#\$  #\+  #\<  #\=  #\>  #\^  #\`  #\|  #\~
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/whitespace
All the characters representing white space:

@example
#x0009  #\tab       ; HORIZONTAL TABULATION
#x000A  #\linefeed  ; LINE FEED
#x000B  #\vtab      ; VERTICAL TABULATION
#x000C  #\page      ; FORM FEED
#x000D  #\return    ; CARRIAGE RETURN
#x0020  #\space     ; SPACE
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/blank
A set holding @code{#\tab} and @code{#\space}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/graphic
The set of all characters that put ink on the page.  It is the union of
@code{char-set:ascii/letter+digit}, @code{char-set:ascii/punctuation}
and @code{char-set:ascii/symbol}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/printable
The set of all the printable characters.  It is the union of
@code{char-set:ascii/whitespace} and @code{char-set:ascii/graphic}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/control
All the characters whose numeric code is in the range @math{[0, 31]}
plus @math{127}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/vowels
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/consonants
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/vowels/lower-case
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/consonants/lower-case
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/vowels/upper-case
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/consonants/upper-case
Sets of vowels and consonants.  Notice that lower case vowels are:
@code{#\a}, @code{#\e}, @code{#\i}, @code{#\o}, @code{#\u}.
@end defvr

@c page
@node char-sets sets blocks
@subsection Sets corresponding to Unicode blocks


The following character sets are defined and exported by the
@library{char-sets blocks} library.


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:block/basic-latin
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-1-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ipa-extensions
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/spacing-modifier-letters
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/combining-diacritical-marks
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/greek-and-coptic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cyrillic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cyrillic-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/armenian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hebrew
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arabic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/syriac
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arabic-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/thaana
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/nko
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/devanagari
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/bengali
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/gurmukhi
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/gujarati
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/oriya
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tamil
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/telugu
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kannada
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/malayalam
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/sinhala
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/thai
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/lao
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tibetan
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/myanmar
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/georgian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hangul-jamo
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ethiopic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ethiopic-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cherokee
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/unified-canadian-aboriginal-syllabics
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ogham
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/runic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tagalog
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hanunoo
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/buhid
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tagbanwa
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/khmer
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/mongolian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/limbu
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tai-le
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/new-tai-lue
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/khmer-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/buginese
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/balinese
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/sundanese
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/lepcha
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ol-chiki
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phonetic-extensions
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phonetic-extensions-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/combining-diacritical-marks-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-additional
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/greek-extended
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/general-punctuation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/superscripts-and-subscripts
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/currency-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/combining-diacritical-mark-for-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/letterlike-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/number-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arrows
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/mathematical-operators
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-technical
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/control-pictures
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/optical-character-recognition
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/enclosed-alphanumerics
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/box-drawing
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/block-elements
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/geometric-shapes
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/dingbats
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-mathematical-symbols-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplemental-arrows-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/braille-patterns
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplemental-arrows-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-mathematical-symbols-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplemental-mathematical-operators
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-symbols-and-arrows
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/glagolitic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-c
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/coptic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/georgian-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tifinagh
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ethiopic-extended
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cyrillic-extended-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplemental-punctuation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-radicals-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kangxi-radicals
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ideographic-description-characters
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-symbols-and-punctuation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hiragana
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/katakana
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/bopomofo
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hangul-compatibility-jamo
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kanbun
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/bopomofo-extended
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-strokes
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/katakana-phonetic-extensions
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/enclosed-cjk-letters-and-months
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-compatibility
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-unified-Ideographs-extension-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/yijing-hexagram-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-unified-ideographs
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/yi-syllables
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/yi-radicals
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/vai
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cyrillic-extended-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/modifier-tone-letters
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-d
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/syloti-nagri
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phags-pa
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/saurashtra
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kayah-li
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/Rejang
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cham
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hangul-syllables
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/private-use-area
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-compatibility-ideographs
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/alphabetic-presentation-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arabic-presentation-forms-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/variation-selectors
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/vertical-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/combining-half-marks
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-compatibility-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/small-form-variants
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arabic-presentation-forms-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/halfwidth-and-fullwidth-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/specials
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/linear-b-syllabary
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/linear-b-ideograms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/aegean-numbers
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ancient-greek-numbers
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ancient-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phaistos-disc
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/lycian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/carian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/old-italic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/gothic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ugaritic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/old-persian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/deseret
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/shavian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/osmanya
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cypriot-syllabary
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phoenician
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/lydian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kharoshthi
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cuneiform
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cuneiform-numbers-and-punctuation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/byzantine-musical-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/musical-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ancient-greek-musical-notation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tai-xuan-jing-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/counting-rod-numerals
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/mathematical-alphanumeric-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/mahjong-tiles
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/domino-tiles
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-unified-ideographs-extension-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-compatibility-ideographs-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tags
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/variation-selectors-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplementary-private-use-area-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplementary-private-use-area-b
These are the character sets corresponding to the ranges defined in the
@file{Blocks.txt} file of the Unicode Character Database.
@end defvr

@c page
@node char-sets sets categories
@subsection Sets corresponding to Unicode general categories


The following character sets are defined and exported by the
@library{char-sets categories} library.

Notice that not all the code points accepted by @func{char=?} are part
of a general category, so the union of the category sets is different
from the full character set @code{char-set:full}.

Categories are disjoint, so the intersection of the category sets is the
empty set.


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:letter-uppercase
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:letter-lowercase
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:letter-titlecase
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:letter-modifier
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:letter-other
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:mark-nospacing
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:mark-spacing-combining
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:mark-enclosing
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:number-decimal-digit
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:number-letter
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:number-other
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:puncutation-connector
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-dash
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-open
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-close
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-initial-quote
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-final-quote
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-other
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:symbol-math
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:symbol-currency
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:symbol-modifier
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:symbol-other
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:separator-space
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:separator-line
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:separator-paragraph
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:control
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:format
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:surrogate
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:private-use
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:not-assigned
One set for each general category defined by the Unicode Standard.
@end defvr

@c page
@node strings
@chapter Strings library


The @library{strings} library extends the string operations available in
the base library.  @ref{baselib strings, Strings}.  While
@library{strings} is a high level interface, @library{strings low} is a
low level interface with the same functionalities.

@menu
* strings intro::               Introduction.
* strings convention::          Interface conventions.
* strings views::               Views over strings.
* strings cons::                Constructors.
* strings pred::                Predicates.
* strings compar::              Comparison.
* strings map::                 Mapping functions.
* strings case::                Case mapping.
* strings fold::                Fold and unfold.
* strings select::              Selection.
* strings pad::                 Padding and trimming.
* strings prefix::              Prefixes and suffixes.
* strings search::              Searching.
* strings filter::              Filtering and deleting.
* strings list::                List and string conversion.
* strings replicate::           Replicate and rotate.
* strings mutate::              Mutators.
* strings misc::                Miscellaneous functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node strings intro
@section Introduction


@subsubheading Library organisation

The functions are split in a high level library, @library{strings}, and
a low level one, @library{strings low}.  The main difference between the
two layers is that the high level library makes heavy usage of macros to
implement the @dfn{string views}, which allow accessing substrings using
a friendly syntax.

All the functions in the low level library are bound to identifiers
starting with @code{%}; for example: @func{string-prefix?} is a high
level macro, @func{%string-prefix?} is its low level function
homologous.

@subsubheading The model for strings

This library relies on the string representation of the underlying
Scheme implementation: Strings are sequences of ``code points'' or
character encodings.  Operations such as comparison or reversal are
always done code point by code point.

It's possible that a legal string might not be a sensible ``text''
sequence; for example, consider a string comprised entirely of
zero--width Unicode accent characters with no preceding base character
to modify: It is a legal string, albeit one that does not make sense
when interpreted as a sequence of natural--language text.  The routines
in @library{strings} do not handle these ``text'' concerns.

@subsubheading Direction of iteration

The library accesses the characters of a string in left--to--right or
right--to--left order depending on the convenience of the algorithm.

@subsubheading Handling side effects

Care must be taken when using functions with side effects.  One reason
for this is that some of the supported Scheme implementations will
collapse equal datum strings in the source code to the same string in
the program.  Mutating such a string in a point of the program, will
make the change visible to other points in the program.  For example:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (rnrs mutable-strings))

(define str1 "abcd")
(define str2 "abcd")

(string-set! str1 2 #\9)
(write str2)
@end example

@noindent
when executed by Ypsilon and Larceny will print @code{"ab9d"}, while
when executed by Ikarus and Mosh will print @code{"abcd"} (last verified
with revisions checked out on Fri Jun 5, 2009).  To avoid this problem
completely, we can change the program in this way:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (rnrs mutable-strings))

(define str1 (string-copy "abcd"))
(define str2 (string-copy "abcd"))

(string-set! str1 2 #\9)
(write str2)
@end example

@noindent
of course we may want to wrap into @func{string-copy} only the strings
that are meant to be mutated.

@c page
@node strings convention
@section Interface conventions


The following naming convention holds:

@itemize
@item
Procedures whose names end in @code{-ci} are case--insensitive variants.

@item
Procedures whose names end in @code{!} are side--effecting variants.
What values these procedures return is usually not specified.

@item
The order of common arguments is consistent across the different
procedures in the high level library, and consistent across the
different procedures in the low level library.  Arguments to some
functions in the high level library have different order from the one of
the homologous low level functions.

@item
Procedures that have left/right directional variants use the following
convention:

@multitable {right--to--left} {Suffix}
@headitem Direction @tab Suffix
@item left-to-right @tab @meta{none}
@item right-to-left @tab --right
@item both @tab --both
@end multitable
@end itemize

In the procedure specifications:

@itemize
@item
An @var{S} argument is a string view, which is expanded by a macro in a
triplet of values: the string, the index of the first char in the
selected substring, the index of the character past the last in the
selected position.  @ref{strings views} for details.

@item
A @var{str} argument is a string.

@item
A @var{char} argument is a character.

@item
The @var{start} and @var{past} arguments are half--open string indices
specifying a substring within a string argument; when unspecified, they
default to zero and the length of the string, respectively.  When
specified, it must be the case that:

@example
0 <= start <= past <= (string-length s)
@end example

@noindent
for the corresponding argument @var{str}.  They typically restrict a
procedure's action to the indicated substring; when @var{start} equals
@var{past} the selected substring is the empty string.

@item
A @var{pred} argument is a unary character predicate procedure,
returning a true/false value when applied to a character.

@item
A @var{char}/@var{char-set}/@var{pred} argument is a value used to
select/search for a character in a string.  If it is a character, it is
used in an equality test; if it is a character set, it is used in a
membership test; if it is a procedure, it is applied to the characters
as a test predicate.

@item
An @var{i} or @var{k} argument is an exact non--negative integer
specifying an index into a string.

@item
The @var{len} and @var{nchars} arguments are exact non--negative
integers specifying a length of a string or some number of characters.

@item
An @var{obj} argument can be any value.
@end itemize

An argument followed by @code{...} means zero--or--more elements.  So
the procedure with the signature:

@example
sum-squares x ...
@end example

@noindent
takes zero or more arguments (@var{x}, @dots{}), while the procedure
with signature:

@example
spell-check doc dict1 dict2 ...
@end example

@noindent
takes two mandatory arguments (@var{doc} and @var{dict1}) and zero or
more optional arguments (@var{dict2} ...).

If a procedure is said to return ``unspecified'', this means that
nothing at all is known about what the procedure returns.  Such a
procedure is not even required to be consistent from call to call.  It
is simply required to return a value (or values) that may be passed to a
command continuation, e.g. as the value of an expression appearing as a
non--terminal subform of a begin expression.

Comparison is simply done on individual code--points of the string.
Unless explicitly stated, for all the functions: Case--insensitive
comparison is done using the functions:

@example
char-ci=? char-ci<? char-ci>? char-ci<=? char-ci>=?
@end example

@noindent
provided by the underlying implementation, or by case--folding
characters with the operation:

@example
(char-downcase (char-upcase c))
@end example

@noindent
where the two case--mapping operations are assumed to be one--to--one,
locale--insensitive and context--insensitive, and compatible with the
one--to--one case mappings specified by Unicode's @file{UnicodeData.txt}
table:

@center @url{ftp://ftp.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/UnicodeData.txt}

@c page
@node strings views
@section Views over strings


String views are syntactic sugar to allow substring specification with
minimum overhead.  Many low level string functions act on substrings
specified with triplets of arguments:

@itemize
@item
The full string.

@item
The @dfn{start index}: The index of the first code point included in the
selected substring.

@item
The @dfn{past index}: The index of the code point past the last code
point included in the selected substring.
@end itemize

To select the substring @code{"hello"} from the string @code{"ciao,
hello, salut"} we have to determine the half--open range of code points,
which is @math{[6, 11)}, then apply a function to the arguments:

@example
(%the-function "ciao, hello, salut" 6 11)

;;              0123456789012345678
;;              0         1
@end example

@noindent
while to select the whole string we can do:

@example
(%the-function "ciao, hello, salut" 0 18)
@end example

@noindent
or:

@example
(let ((str "ciao, hello, salut"))
  (%the-function str 0 (string-length str)))
@end example

With the string views implemented by @library{strings}, the low level
function is wrapped by a high level syntax which can be invoked as:

@example
(the-function "ciao, hello, salut")
        ; select the whole string

(the-function (view "ciao, hello, salut"))
        ; select the whole string

(the-function (view "ciao, hello, salut"
                (start 6)))
        ; select the substring [6, 18)

(the-function (view "ciao, hello, salut"
                (start 6)
                (past 11)))
        ; select the substring [6, 11)

(the-function (view "ciao, hello, salut"
                (past 11)))
        ; select the substring [0, 11)
@end example

@noindent
instead of a triplet of arguments, the string view is a single argument
that can be:

@table @code
@item @meta{string}
@itemx (view @meta{string})
The string itself or an unquoted list holding the string itself,
prefixed by the @code{view} auxiliary syntax: It selects the whole
string.

@item (view @meta{string} (start @meta{start-index}))
An unquoted list holding the string and the start index, with auxiliary
syntaxes @code{view} and @code{start}: It selects the substring from the
start index to the end.

@item (view @meta{string} (past @meta{past-index}))
An unquoted list holding the string and the past index, with auxiliary
syntaxes @code{view} and @code{past}: It selects the substring from zero
to the selected past index.

@itemx (view @meta{string} (start @meta{start-index}) (past @meta{past-index}))
An unquoted list holding the string, the start index and the past index,
with auxiliary syntaxes @code{view}, @code{start} and @code{past}: It
selects the substring between the start and past indexes.
@end table

@noindent
@code{@meta{string}}, @code{@meta{start-index}} and
@code{@meta{past-index}} can be arbitrary Scheme expressions.  High
level macros accepting two or more substrings as arguments, support
string views for all of them.  When we are concerned with the overhead
of string views, we can use the low level functions directly.

In the following documentation: Low level functions and high level
macros are documented together; only the meaning of arguments to the low
level function are described, the meaning of high level arguments is
obvious.

@c page
@node strings cons
@section Constructors


@defun string-concatenate @var{string-list}
Append the elements of @var{string-list} together into a single string.
Guaranteed to return a freshly allocated string.
@end defun


@deffn Function %string-concatenate-reverse @var{string-list} @var{final-string} @var{nchars}
@deffnx Macro string-concatenate-reverse @var{string-list}
@deffnx Macro string-concatenate-reverse @var{string-list} @var{final-string}
@deffnx Macro string-concatenate-reverse @var{string-list} @var{final-string} @var{nchars}
Reverse @var{string-list} then concatenate the elements, which must be
strings.  The first @var{nchars} code points in @var{final-string} are
consed onto the beginning of @var{string-list} before performing the the
reversal and concatenation operations.

@var{final-string} defaults to the empty string and @var{nchars}
defaults to the length of @var{final-string}.

This procedure is useful in the construction of procedures that
accumulate character data into lists of string buffers, and wish to
convert the accumulated data into a single string when done.
@end deffn


@defun string-tabulate @var{integer->char} @var{len}
Construct a string of size @var{len} by applying @var{integer->char} to
each index in the range @math{[0, @var{len})} to produce the
corresponding string element.  The order in which @var{integer->char} is
applied to the indices is not specified.
@end defun

@c page
@node strings pred
@section Predicates


@defun string-null? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is the empty string, otherwise return
@false{}.
@end defun


@deffn Function %string-every @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-any @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-every @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{S}
@deffnx Macro string-any @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{S}
Check to see if the given criteria is true on every/any character in
@var{str}, proceeding from left (index @var{start}) to right (index
@var{past}).

If the selected substring is empty, the return value is @false{}.

If @var{char/char-set/pred} is a character, it is tested for equality
with the elements of @var{s}.

If @var{char/char-set/pred} is a character set, the elements of @var{s}
are tested for membership in the set.

If @var{char/char-set/pred} is a predicate procedure, it is applied to
the elements of @var{s}.  The predicate is ``witness--generating'':

@itemize
@item
If @func{string-any} returns true, the returned true value is the one
produced by the application of the predicate.

@item
If @func{string-every} returns true, the returned true value is the one
produced by the application of the predicate to the last code point in
the substring.
@end itemize

If the predicate is applied to the final element of the selected
substring, that final application is a tail call.

The names of these procedures do not end with a question mark; this is
to indicate that, in the predicate case, they do not return a simple
boolean (@true{} or @false{}), but a general value.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings compar
@section Comparison


@deffn Function %string-compare @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2} @var{proc<} @var{proc=} @var{proc>}
@deffnx Function %string-compare-ci @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2} @var{proc<} @var{proc=} @var{proc>}
@deffnx Macro string-compare @var{S1} @var{S2} @var{proc<} @var{proc=} @var{proc>}
@deffnx Marco string-compare-ci @var{S1} @var{S2} @var{proc<} @var{proc=} @var{proc>}
Determine the @dfn{mismatch index} between the two substrings: the
largest index @math{i} such that for every @math{0 <= j < i},
@math{str1[j] = str2[j]}; that is, @math{i} is the first position that
does not match.

The mismatch index is always an index into @var{str1}; in the case of
equal strings, it is always @var{past1}; the functions observe the
protocol in this redundant case for uniformity.

The characters at the mismatch index are compared using @func{char<?}
or @func{char-ci<?}.  @var{proc<}, @var{proc=}, or @var{proc>} are
applied to the mismatch index (not character), depending upon whether
the substring of @var{str1} is less than, equal to, or greater than the
substring of @var{str2}.  The result of the application is returned.

If we just want to have the mismatch index as return value: We can use
@func{values} as value for @var{proc<}, @var{proc=} and @var{proc>}.
Another interesting option is to use @code{(lambda (mismatch-index) #f)}
or @code{(lambda (mismatch-index) #t)}.

Examples:

@example
(string-compare "abcd" "abcd" values values values)
@result{} 4

(string-compare "abcd" "abcd12" values values values)
@result{} 4
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string= @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-ci= @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string= @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-ci= @var{S1} @var{S2}
Compare two substrings: Return true if they are equal according to
@func{char=?}, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string<> @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-ci<> @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string<> @var{S1} @var{S1}
@deffnx Macro string-ci<> @var{S1} @var{S2}
Compare two substrings: Return @false{} if they are equal according to
@func{char=?}, true otherwise.
@end deffn


The following predicates are the lexicographic extensions of the
corresponding character predicates.  A string @var{str1} is
``lexicographically'' less than @var{str2} if @var{str1} would come
first in a dictionary.


@deffn Function %string< @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-ci< @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string< @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-ci< @var{S1} @var{S2}
Compare two substrings: Return true if the first is lexicographically
less than the second, @false{} otherwise.  If @var{str2} is longer than
@var{str1} but the substrings are equal up to the end of @var{str1}:
Return @true{}.

@example
(string< "abcd" "abcd") @result{} #f
(string< "abc"  "abcd") @result{} #t
(string< "abcd" "abc") @result{} #f
(string< "ABcd" "abcd") @result{} #t
(string< "abcd" "a2cd") @result{} #f

(string-ci< "abcd" "abcd") @result{} #f
(string-ci< "abc"  "abcd") @result{} #t
(string-ci< "abcd" "abc") @result{} #f
(string-ci< "ABcd" "abcd") @result{} #f
(string-ci< "abcd" "a2cd") @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string<= @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-ci<= @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string<= @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-ci<= @var{S1} @var{S2}
Compare two substrings: Return true if the first is lexicographically
less than, or equal to, the second; @false{} otherwise.  If @var{str2}
is longer than @var{str1} but the substrings are equal up to the end of
@var{str1}: Return @true{}.

@example
(string<= "abcd" "abcd") @result{} #t
(string<= "abc"  "abcd") @result{} #t
(string<= "abcd" "abc") @result{} #f
(string<= "ABcd" "abcd") @result{} #t
(string<= "abcd" "a2cd") @result{} #f

(string-ci<= "abcd" "abcd") @result{} #t
(string-ci<= "abc"  "abcd") @result{} #t
(string-ci<= "abcd" "abc") @result{} #f
(string-ci<= "ABcd" "abcd") @result{} #t
(string-ci<= "abcd" "a2cd") @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string> @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-ci> @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string> @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-ci> @var{S1} @var{S2}
Compare two substrings: Return true if the first is lexicographically
greater than the second, @false{} otherwise.  If @var{str1} is longer
than @var{str2} but the substrings are equal up to the end of
@var{str2}: Return @true{}.

@example
(string> "abcd" "abcd") @result{} #f
(string> "abcd" "abc") @result{} #t
(string> "abc"  "abcd") @result{} #f
(string> "abcd" "ABcd") @result{} #t
(string> "a2cd" "abcd") @result{} #f

(string-ci> "abcd" "abcd") @result{} #f
(string-ci> "abcd" "abc") @result{} #t
(string-ci> "abc"  "abcd") @result{} #f
(string-ci> "abcd" "ABcd") @result{} #f
(string-ci> "a2cd" "abcd") @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string>= @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-ci>= @var{str1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string>= @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-ci>= @var{S1} @var{S2}
Compare two substrings: Return true if the first is lexicographically
greater than, or equal to, the second; @false{} otherwise.  If
@var{str1} is longer than @var{str2} but the substrings are equal up to
the end of @var{str2}: Return @true{}.

@example
(string>= "abcd" "abcd") @result{} #t
(string>= "abcd" "abc") @result{} #t
(string>= "abc" "abcd") @result{} #f
(string>= "abcd" "ABcd") @result{} #t
(string>= "a2cd" "abcd") @result{} #f

(string-ci>= "abcd" "abcd") @result{} #t
(string-ci>= "abcd" "abc") @result{} #t
(string-ci>= "abc"  "abcd") @result{} #f
(string-ci>= "abcd" "ABcd") @result{} #t
(string-ci>= "a2cd" "abcd") @result{} #f
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings map
@section Mapping functions


@defun string-map @var{proc} @var{str0} @var{str} ...
Build and return a newly allocated string mapping @var{proc} over all
the characters of the string arguments, from zero to the end in
increasing order.  It is an error if the strings have different length.

@var{proc} must return a character and it is applied to the elements as:

@example
(@var{proc} @var{idx}
  (string-ref @var{str0} @var{idx})
  (string-ref @var{str}  @var{idx})
  ...)
@end example

@noindent
where @var{idx} is the current index.
@end defun


@defun string-map! @var{proc} @var{str0} @var{str} ...
@defunx string-map*! @var{proc} @var{str0} @var{str} ...
Mutate string @var{str0} mapping @var{proc} over all the elements of the
string arguments, from zero to the end in increasing order.

@func{string-map!} must be applied to strings of the same length;
@func{string-map*!} accepts strings of different length and iterates
until the end of the shorter is reached.

@var{proc} is applied to the elements as:

@example
(@var{proc} @var{idx}
  (string-ref @var{str0} @var{idx})
  (string-ref @var{str}  @var{idx})
  ...)
@end example

@noindent
where @var{idx} is the current index.
@end defun


@defun string-for-each* @var{proc} @var{str0} @var{str} ...
Apply @var{proc} over all the elements of the string arguments, from
zero to the end in increasing order.  This function accepts strings of
different length and iterates until the end of the shorter is reached.

@var{proc} is applied to the elements as:

@example
(@var{proc} @var{idx}
  (string-ref @var{str0} @var{idx})
  (string-ref @var{str}  @var{idx})
  ...)
@end example

@noindent
where @var{idx} is the current index.
@end defun


@subsubheading Mapping over substrings


@deffn Function %substring-map @var{proc} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro substring-map @var{proc} @var{S}
Build and return a new string mapping @var{proc} over the characters in
the selected substring of @var{str}, from index @var{start} to index
@var{past} in increasing order.  @var{proc} must be a @code{char->char}
procedure.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %substring-map! @var{proc} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro substring-map! @var{proc} @var{S}
Mutate the selected substring of @var{str}, mapping @var{proc} over its
characters from index @var{start} to index @var{past} in increasing
order.  @var{proc} must be a @code{char->char} procedure.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %substring-for-each @var{proc} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro substring-for-each @var{proc} @var{V}
Apply @var{proc} to each character in the selected substring of
@var{str}, from index @var{start} to index @var{past} in increasing
order.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %substring-for-each-index @var{proc} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro substring-for-each-index @var{proc} @var{V}
Apply @var{proc} to each index in the selected substring of @var{str},
from index @var{start} to index @var{past} in increasing order.  This is
simply a method of looping over a string that is guaranteed to be safe
and correct.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings case
@section Case mapping


@deffn Function %string-titlecase*! @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-titlecase* @var{s}
@deffnx Macro string-titlecase*! @var{s}
For every character @math{c} in the selected range of @var{str}, if
@math{c} is preceded by a cased character, it is downcased; otherwise it
is titlecased.

@func{string-titlecase*} returns the result string and does not alter
its s parameter.  @func{string-titlecase!} is the in--place
side--effecting variant.

Examples:

@example
(string-titlecase* "--capitalize tHIS sentence.")
@result{} "--Capitalize This Sentence."

(string-titlecase* "see Spot run. see Nix run.")
@result{} "See Spot Run. See Nix Run."

(string-titlecase* "3com makes routers.")
@result{} "3Com Makes Routers."
@end example

Note that the character preceding @code{str[start]} has no effect on the
titlecase decision for character @code{str[start]}:

@example
(string-titlecase* ("greasy fried chicken" 2))
@result{} "Easy Fried Chicken"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Macro string-upcase* @var{s}
@deffnx Macro string-upcase*! @var{s}
@deffnx Macro string-downcase* @var{s}
@deffnx Macro string-downcase*! @var{s}
Raise or lower the case of the alphabetic characters in the string.
There are no low level functions for these macros because they are just
wrappers for @func{%string-map} and @func{%string-map!}.

@func{string-upcase} and @func{string-downcase} return the result string
and do not alter their s parameter.  @func{string-upcase!} and
@func{string-downcase!} are the in--place side--effecting variants.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings fold
@section Fold and unfold


@defun string-fold-left @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{str0} @var{str} ...
@defunx string-fold-right @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{str0} @var{str} ...
The fundamental string iterator.  The string arguments must have the
same length.

@var{kons} is iterated left--to--right over each index in all of the
strings, stopping at the end of the shortest; @var{kons} is applied as:

@example
(@var{kons} @var{idx} @var{state}
  (string-ref @var{str0} @var{idx})
  (string-ref @var{str}  @var{idx})
  )
@end example

@noindent
where @var{state} is the current state value; the current state value
begins with @var{knil}, and becomes whatever @var{kons} returned at the
respective iteration; @var{idx} is the current index.

@func{string-fold-right} is similar to @func{string-fold}, but it
iterates right--to--left.

@quotation
Notice that to allow for an unspecified number of arguments, these folds
hand the state as first argument to @var{kons}, as opposed to the usual
fold arguments.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun string-fold-left* @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{str0} @var{str} ...
@defunx string-fold-right* @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{str0} @var{str} ...
Like @func{string-fold} and @func{string-unfold} but accept strings of
different length, iterating until the end of the shorter one.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Function %substring-fold-left @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %substring-fold-right @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-fold @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{S}
@deffnx Macro string-fold-right @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{S}
Fundamental iterators for substrings.  @var{kons} is iterated over each
character of the selected substring:

@example
(@var{kons}
  (string-ref @var{str} (+ @var{start} @var{idx}))
  @var{state})
@end example

@noindent
where @var{state} is the current state value; the current state value
begins with @var{knil}, and becomes whatever @var{kons} returned at the
respective iteration; @var{idx} is the current index.

The left--fold iterator, @func{%substring-fold-left}, builds the return
value as:

@example
(@var{kons}
  (string-ref @var{str} (- @var{past} 1))
  (@var{kons}
    (string-ref @var{str} (- @var{past} 2))
    ...
      (@var{kons}
        (string-ref @var{str} (+ @var{start} 2))
        (@var{kons}
           (string-ref @var{str} (+ @var{start} 1))
           (@var{kons}
              (string-ref @var{str} @var{start})
              @var{knil})))))
@end example

The right--fold iterator, @func{%substring-fold-right}, builds the
return value as:

@example
(@var{kons}
  (string-ref @var{str} @var{start}
  (@var{kons}
    (string-ref @var{str} (+ @var{start} 1))
    ...
      (@var{kons}
        (string-ref @var{str} (- @var{past} 3))
        (@var{kons}
           (string-ref @var{str} (- @var{past} 2))
           (@var{kons}
              (string-ref @var{str} (- @var{past} 1))
              @var{knil})))))
@end example

Examples:

@example
;; Convert a string to a list of chars.
(substring-fold-left cons '() "abcd")
@result{} (#\d #\c #\b #\a))

;; Count the number of upper-case characters in a string.
(substring-fold-left (lambda (c count)
                       (if (char-upper-case? c)
                           (+ count 1)
                         count))
                     0
                     "ABCdefGHi")
@result{} 5

;; Double every backslash character in S.
(let* ((str "abc\\de\\f\\ghi")
       (ans-len (string-fold
                 (lambda (c sum)
                   (+ sum (if (char=? c #\\) 2 1)))
                 0 str))
       (ans (make-string ans-len)))
  (substring-fold-left
   (lambda (c i)
     (let ((i (if (char=? c #\\)
                  (begin
                    (string-set! ans i #\\)
                    (+ i 1))
                i)))
        (string-set! ans i c)
        (+ i 1)))
    0 str)
   ans)
@result{} "abc\\\\de\\\\f\\\\ghi"
@end example
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@defun string-unfold @var{stop?} @var{seed->char} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed}
@defunx string-unfold @var{stop?} @var{seed->char} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed} @var{base-string}
@defunx string-unfold @var{stop?} @var{seed->char} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed} @var{base-string} @var{make-final}
This is a fundamental constructor for strings.  Arguments description
follows.

@table @var
@item make-seed
A map function used to generate a series of ``seed'' values from the
initial seed:

@example
@var{first-seed}
(@var{make-seed} @var{first-seed})            @result{} seed2
(@var{make-seed} seed2)                 @result{} seed3
(@var{make-seed} seed3)                 @result{} seed4
...
@end example

@item stop?
A predicate function telling when to stop generating characters; when it
returns true when applied to one of the seed values.

@item seed->char
Map function mapping each seed value to the corresponding character in
the result string.  These chars are assembled into the string in a
left--to--right order.

@item base
An optional string which is used as initial/leftmost portion of the
constructed string.  Defaults to the empty string.

@item make-final
Optional function applied to the terminal seed value (on which
@var{stop?}  returns true) to produce the final/rightmost portion of the
constructed string.  Defaults to @code{(lambda (x) "")}.
@end table

More precisely, the following (simple, inefficient) definitions hold:

@example
;; iterative
(define (string-unfold stop? seed->char make-seed
                       first-seed base-string make-final)
  (let loop ((seed    first-seed)
             (result  base-string))
    (if (stop? seed)
        (string-append result (make-final seed))
      (loop (make-seed seed)
            (string-append result
                           (string (seed->char seed)))))))

;; recursive
(define (string-unfold stop? seed->char make-seed
                       first-seed base-string make-final)
  (string-append
     base-string
     (let loop ((seed first-seed))
       (if (stop? seed)
           (make-final seed)
         (string-append (string (seed->char seed))
                        (loop (make-seed seed)))))))
@end example

This function is a fairly powerful string constructor; we can use it to
convert a list to a string, read a port into a string, reverse a string,
copy a string, and so forth.  Examples:

@example
(port->string p) = (string-unfold eof-object? values
                                  (lambda (x) (read-char p))
                                  (read-char p))

(list->string lis) = (string-unfold null? car cdr lis)

(string-tabulate f size) = (string-unfold (lambda (i)
                                            (= i size))
                                          f add1 0)
@end example

@noindent
to map @code{proc} over a list @var{lis}, producing a string:

@example
(string-unfold null? (compose proc car) cdr lis)
@end example

Interested functional programmers may enjoy noting that
@func{string-fold-right} and @func{string-unfold} are in some sense
inverses.  That is, given operations @var{knull?}, @var{kar}, @var{kdr},
@var{kons}, and @var{knil} satisfying:

@example
(kons (kar x) (kdr x)) @result{} x
(knull? knil) @result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
then:

@example
(string-fold-right kons knil
                   (string-unfold knull? kar kdr x))
@result{} x
@end example

@noindent
and:

@example
(string-unfold knull? kar kdr
               (string-fold-right kons knil s))
@result{} s
@end example

The final string constructed does not share storage with either
@var{base-string} or the value produced by @var{make-final}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@defun string-unfold-right @var{stop?} @var{seed->char} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed}
@defunx string-unfold-right @var{stop?} @var{seed->char} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed} @var{base-string}
@defunx string-unfold-right @var{stop?} @var{seed->char} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed} @var{base-string} @var{make-final}
This is a fundamental constructor for strings.  The arguments are like
the ones of @func{string-unfold}.  The difference from
@func{string-unfold} is that this function builds the string from right
to left; more precisely, the following (simple, inefficient) definitions
hold:

@example
;; iterative
(define (string-unfold-right
           stop? seed->char make-seed
           first-seed base-string make-final)
  (let lp ((seed    first-seed)
           (result  base))
    (if (stop? seed)
        (string-append (make-final seed) result)
      (loop (make-seed seed)
            (string-append (string (seed->char seed))
                           result)))))

;; recursive
(define (string-unfold-right
           stop? seed->char make-seed
           first-seed base-string make-final)
  (string-append
     (let loop ((seed first-seed))
       (if (stop? seed)
           (make-final seed)
         (string-append (loop (make-seed seed))
                        (string (seed->char seed)))))
     base))
@end example

Interested functional programmers may enjoy noting that
@func{string-fold} and @func{string-unfold-right} are in some sense
inverses.  That is, given operations @var{knull?}, @var{kar}, @var{kdr},
@var{kons}, and @var{knil} satisfying:

@example
(kons (kar x) (kdr x)) @result{} x
(knull? knil) @result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
then:

@example
(string-fold kons knil
             (string-unfold-right knull? kar kdr x))
@result{} x
@end example

@noindent
and:

@example
(string-unfold-right knull? kar kdr
                     (string-fold kons knil s))
@result{} s
@end example

The final string constructed does not share storage with either
@var{base-string} or the value produced by @func{make-final}.
@end defun

@c page
@node strings select
@section Selection


@deffn Macro substring* @var{S}
Wrapper for @func{substring} accepting a string view as argument.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-copy* @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-copy* @var{S}
The function @func{%string-copy*} is an alias for @func{substring}; the
macro @func{string-copy*} is an alias for @func{substring*}.

@quotation
These exist for symmetry with the @library{vectors} library; they allow
more confidence in converting a vector function into a string function,
and vice versa, by just replacing the string @code{vector} with the
string @code{string}, and vice versa.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-reverse-copy* @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-reverse-copy* @var{V}
Like @func{%string-copy*}, but copy the elements in the reverse order
from the selected substring of @var{str}.

@example
(string-reverse-copy* (view "543210")
                        (start 1)
                        (past  5)))
@result{} "1234"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-copy*! @var{dst-str} @var{dst-start} @var{src-str} @var{src-start} @var{src-past}
@deffnx Macro string-copy*! @var{dst-S} @var{src-S}
Write the selected source substring into the selected destination
substring.  This function is the side--effecting variant of
@func{substring} and @func{substring*}.  This function supports copying
over the same string.

The selected destination substring starts at @var{dst-start} in
@var{dst-str} and may extend until the end of the string.  In the
destination string view @var{dst-S}: If a past index is specified, it is
ignored.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-reverse-copy*! @var{dst-str} @var{dst-start} @var{src-str} @var{src-start} @var{src-past}
@deffnx Macro string-reverse-copy*! @var{V-dst} @var{V-src}
Like @func{%string-copy*!}, but this copies the elements in the reverse
order.  This function supports copying over the same string.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-take @var{nchars} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-take-right @var{nchars} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-take @var{S} @var{nchars}
@deffnx Macro string-take-right @var{S} @var{nchars}
Return the first or last @var{nchars} of the selected substring.  These
functions always return a newly allocated string.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-drop @var{nchars} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-drop-right @var{nchars} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-drop @var{S} @var{nchars}
@deffnx Macro string-drop-right @var{S} @var{nchars}
Drop the first or last @var{nchars} of the selected substring and return
the resulting string.  These functions always return a newly allocated
string.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings pad
@section Padding and trimming


@deffn Function %string-pad @var{requested-len} @var{fill-char} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-pad-right @var{requested-len} @var{fill-char} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-pad @var{S} @var{requested-len}
@deffnx Macro string-pad @var{S} @var{requested-len} @var{fill-char}
@deffnx Macro string-pad-right @var{S} @var{requested-len}
@deffnx Macro string-pad-right @var{S} @var{requested-len} @var{fill-char}
Build a string of length @var{requested-len} comprised of @var{str}
padded on the left or right by as many occurrences of the character
@var{fill-char} as needed.  Always return a newly allocated string.

If @var{str} has more than @var{requested-len} chars, it is truncated on
the left or right to length @var{requested-len}.  For the macros:
@var{fill-char} defaults to @code{#\space}.

Examples:

@example
(string-pad     "325" 5) @result{} "  325"
(string-pad   "71325" 5) @result{} "71325"
(string-pad "8871325" 5) @result{} "71325"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-trim @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-trim-right @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-trim-both @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-trim @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
@deffnx Macro string-trim-right @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
@deffnx Macro string-trim-both @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
Trim @var{str} by skipping over all characters on the left/on the
right/on both sides that satisfy the second parameter
@var{char/char-set/pred}:

@itemize
@item
If it is a character @var{char}, characters equal to @var{char} are
trimmed.

@item
If it is a char set @var{char-set}, characters contained in
@var{char-set} are trimmed.

@item
If it is a predicate @var{pred}, it is a test predicate that is applied
to the characters in @var{s}; a character causing it to return true is
skipped.
@end itemize

Always return a newly allocated string.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings prefix
@section Prefixes and suffixes


@deffn Function %string-prefix-length @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-prefix-length-ci @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string-prefix-length @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-prefix-length-ci @var{S1} @var{S2}
Return the length of the longest common prefix of the two substrings.
This is equivalent to the ``mismatch index'' for the strings (modulo the
start index offsets).
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-suffix-length @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-suffix-length-ci @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string-suffix-length @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-suffix-length-ci @var{S1} @var{S2}
Return the length of the longest common suffix of the two substrings.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-prefix? @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-prefix-ci? @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string-prefix? @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-prefix-ci? @var{S1} @var{S2}
Return @true{} if the selected substring of @var{str1} is a prefix of
the selected substring of @var{str2}, otherwise return @false{}.  Notice
that the empty string is a prefix of every string.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-suffix? @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-suffix-ci? @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string-suffix? @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-suffix-ci? @var{S1} @var{S2}
Return @true{} if the selected substring of @var{str1} is a suffix of
the selected substring of @var{str2}, otherwise return @false{}.  Notice
that the empty string is @strong{not} a suffix of every string.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings search
@section Searching


@deffn Function %string-index @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-index-right @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-index @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
@deffnx Macro string-index-right @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
Search through the string from the left or right, returning the index of
the first occurrence of a character which:

@itemize
@item
Equals @var{char/char-set/pred} if it is a character.

@item
Is in @var{char/char-set/pred} if it is a character set.

@item
Satisfies the predicate @var{char/char-set/pred} if it is a procedure.
@end itemize

If no match is found: Return @false{}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-skip @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-skip-right @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-skip @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
@deffnx Macro string-skip-right @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
Search through the string from the left or right, returning the index of
the first occurrence of a character which:

@itemize
@item
Does not equal @var{char/char-set/pred} if it is a character.

@item
Is not in @var{char/char-set/pred} if it is a character set.

@item
Does not satisfy the predicate @var{char/char-set/pred} if it is a
procedure.
@end itemize

If no match is found: Return @false{}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-count @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-count @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
Return a count of the number of characters in @var{str} that satisfy the
@var{char/char-set/pred} argument:

@itemize
@item
If it is a procedure, it is applied to the character as a predicate.

@item
If it is a character set, the character is tested for membership.

@item
If it is a character, it is used in an equality test.
@end itemize
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-contains @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Function %string-contains-ci @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string-contains @var{S1} @var{S2}
@deffnx Macro string-contains-ci @var{S1} @var{S2}
Return true if the selected substring of @var{str1} contains the
selected substring of @var{str2}, else return @false{}.  The return
value is the index in @var{str1} where the substring of @var{str2}
occurs.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings filter
@section Filtering and deleting


@deffn Function %string-filter @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-filter @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
Filter the selected substring, retaining only those characters that
satisfy the @var{char/char-set/pred} argument:

@itemize
@item
If it is a procedure, it is applied to the character as a predicate.

@item
If it is a character set, the character is tested for membership.

@item
If it is a character, it is used in an equality test.
@end itemize

Always return a newly allocated string.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-delete @var{char/char-set/pred} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-delete @var{S} @var{char/char-set/pred}
Filter the selected substring, retaining only those characters that do
@strong{not} satisfy the @var{char/char-set/pred} argument:

@itemize
@item
If it is a procedure, it is applied to the character as a predicate.

@item
If it is a character set, the character is tested for membership.

@item
If it is a character, it is used in an equality test.
@end itemize

Always return a newly allocated string.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings list
@section List and string conversion


@deffn Function %string->list* @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string->list* @var{S}
Return a newly allocated list of the characters that make up the given
substring.  This is an extension of the @func{string->list} function
that adds support for substrings.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %reverse-string->list @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro reverse-string->list @var{S}
Like @func{%string->list*} but reverses the order of the characters from
the substring.
@end deffn


@defun reverse-list->string @var{char-list}
Reverse the given list of characters, then compose a string with the
result.

@example
(reverse-list->string '(#\a #\B #\c))
@result{} "cBa"
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Function %string-tokenize @var{token-set} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-tokenise @var{token-set} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-tokenize @var{S} @var{token-set}
@deffnx Macro string-tokenise @var{S} @var{token-set}
Split the selected substring into a list of strings, where each string
is a maximal, non--empty, contiguous sequence of characters from the
character set @var{token-set}.

@example
(string-tokenize "Help make programs run, run, RUN!"
                 (char-set #\space))
@result{} ("Help" "make" "programs" "run," "run," "RUN!")
@end example

@quotation
This function provides a minimal parsing facility for simple
applications.  More sophisticated parsers that handle quoting and
backslash effects can easily be constructed using regular--expression
systems; be careful not to use @func{string-tokenize} in contexts where
more serious parsing is needed.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@defun string-join @var{string-list}
@defunx string-join @var{string-list} @var{delimiter}
@defunx string-join @var{string-list} @var{delimiter} @var{grammar}
@defunx %string-join @var{string-list} @var{delimiter} @var{grammar}
This procedure is a simple unparser: It pastes strings together using
the @var{delimiter} string.  @var{delimiter} defaults to a single white
space.  @var{grammar} is a symbol that determines how the delimiter is
used, and defaults to @code{infix}.  Supported values for @var{grammar}
are:

@table @code
@item infix
Means an infix or separator grammar: Insert the delimiter between list
elements.  An empty list will produce an empty string.

@quotation
@strong{Note}: Parsing an empty string with an infix grammar is
ambiguous.  Is it an empty list, or a list of one element, the empty
string?
@end quotation

@item strict-infix
Means the same as @code{infix}, but will raise an error if given an
empty list.

@item suffix
Means a suffix or terminator grammar: Insert the delimiter after every
list element.  This grammar has no ambiguities.

@item prefix
Means a prefix grammar: Insert the delimiter before every list element.
This grammar has no ambiguities.
@end table

The delimiter is the string used to delimit elements; it defaults to a
single space.

Examples:

@example
(string-join '("foo" "bar" "baz") ":")
@result{} "foo:bar:baz"

(string-join '("foo" "bar" "baz") ":" 'suffix)
@result{} "foo:bar:baz:"

;; Infix grammar is ambiguous wrt empty list vs. empty string,
(string-join '()   ":") @result{} ""
(string-join '("") ":") @result{} ""

(string-join '("") "," 'strict-infix) @result{} ""
(string-join '("") "," 'suffix) @result{} ","
(string-join '("") "," 'prefix) @result{} ","
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node strings replicate
@section Replicate and rotate


@deffn Function %xsubstring @var{from} @var{to} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro xsubstring @var{S} @var{from} @var{to}
Extended substring procedure replicating the selected substring ``up and
down'' index space, in both the positive and negative directions.

The call:

@example
(%xsubstring from to "abcdefg" 3 6)
@end example

@noindent
selects the substring @code{"def"} and defines the conceptual
bidirectionally--infinite string:

@example
...  e  f  d  e  f  d  e  f  d  e  f ...
... -5 -4 -3 -2 -1  0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 ...
                    ^
@end example

@noindent
that is @code{def} repeated in both directions.  @func{%xsubstring}
returns the substring of this string beginning at index @var{from}, and
ending at @var{to}.

We can use this function to perform a variety of tasks:

@itemize
@item
To replicate a string:

@example
(xsubstring "abc" 0 7) @result{} "abcabca"
@end example

@item
To rotate a string left:

@example
(xsubstring "abcdef" 1  7) @result{} "bcdefa"
(xsubstring "abcdef" 2  8) @result{} "cdefab"
(xsubstring "abcdef" 3  9) @result{} "defabc"
(xsubstring "abcdef" 4 10) @result{} "efabcd"
(xsubstring "abcdef" 5 11) @result{} "fabcde"
@end example

@item
To rotate a string right:

@example
(xsubstring "abcdef" -1 5) @result{} "fabcde"
(xsubstring "abcdef" -2 4) @result{} "efabcd"
(xsubstring "abcdef" -3 3) @result{} "defabc"
(xsubstring "abcdef" -4 2) @result{} "cdefab"
(xsubstring "abcdef" -5 1) @result{} "bcdefa"
@end example
@end itemize

Note that:

@itemize
@item
The @var{from}/@var{to} indices give a half--open range; the characters
from index @var{from} up to, but not including, index @var{to}.

@item
The @var{from}/@var{to} indices are not in terms of the index space for
string @var{str}.  They are in terms of the replicated index space of
the substring defined by @var{str}, @var{start}, and @var{past}.
@end itemize

It is an error if @var{start} equals @var{past}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function xstring-xcopy! @var{from} @var{to} @var{target} @var{target-start} @var{source} @var{source-start} @var{source-past}
@deffnx Macro string-xcopy! @var{target-S} @var{source-S} @var{from} @var{to}
Exactly the same as @func{%xsubstring}, but the extracted text is
written into the selected substring of @var{target}.

This operation is not defined if @code{(eq? target start)}; we cannot
copy a string on top of itself.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings mutate
@section Mutators


@defun string-swap! @var{str} @var{i} @var{j}
Swap the characters in @var{str} at positions @var{i} and @var{j}.
@end defun


@deffn Function %string-fill*! @var{fill-char} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-fill*! @var{S} @var{fill-char}
Fill the selected substring with @var{fill-char}, modifying the original
string.
@end deffn

@c page
@node strings misc
@section Miscellaneous functions


@deffn Function %string-replace @var{str1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{str2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro string-replace @var{S1} @var{S2}
Replace the selected string in @var{str1} with the selected string in
@var{str2}.  Return a newly allocated string.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %string-reverse @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %string-reverse! @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro string-reverse @var{S}
@deffnx Macro string-reverse! @var{S}
Reverse the string.  @func{%string-reverse} returns the result string
and does not alter its @var{str} parameter.  @func{%string-reverse!} is
the in--place side--effecting variant.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors
@chapter Vectors library


The @library{vectors} library extends the vector operations available in
the base library.  @ref{baselib vectors, Vectors}.  While
@library{vectors} is a high level interface, @library{vectors low} is a
low level interface with the same functionalities.

@menu
* vectors intro::               Introduction.
* vectors convention::          Interface conventions.
* vectors views::               Views over vectors.
* vectors cons::                Constructors.
* vectors pred::                Predicates.
* vectors compar::              Comparison.
* vectors fold::                Fold and unfold.
* vectors select::              Selection.
* vectors pad::                 Padding and trimming.
* vectors prefix::              Prefixes and suffixes.
* vectors search::              Searching.
* vectors filter::              Filtering and deleting.
* vectors list::                List and vector conversion.
* vectors replicate::           Replicate and rotate.
* vectors mutate::              Mutators.
* vectors misc::                Miscellaneous functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node vectors intro
@section Introduction


@subsubheading Library organisation

The functions are split in a high level library, @library{vectors}, and
a low level one, @library{vectors low}.  The main difference between the
two layers is that the high level library makes heavy usage of macros to
implement the @dfn{vector views}, which allow accessing subvectors using
a friendly syntax.

All the functions in the low level library are bound to identifiers
starting with @code{%}; for example: @func{vector-prefix?} is a high
level macro, @func{%vector-prefix?} is its low level function
homologous.

@subsubheading Direction of iteration

The library accesses the values of a vector in left--to--right or
right--to--left order depending on the convenience of the algorithm.

@subsubheading Handling side effects

Care must be taken when using functions with side effects.  One reason
for this is that some of the supported Scheme implementations will treat
a literal vector as a constant, so the following raises an error:

@example
(import (rnrs))

(define vec '#(0 1 2 3 4))
(vector-set! vec 2 #\9)
@end example

@noindent
To avoid this problem completely, we can change the program in this way:

@example
(import (rnrs))

(define vec (vector-copy '#(0 1 2 3 4)))
(vector-set! vec 2 #\9)
@end example

@noindent
of course we may want to wrap into @func{vector-copy} only the vectors
that are meant to be mutated.

@c page
@node vectors convention
@section Interface conventions


In order to simplify text in this documentation section, the values of a
vector are called @dfn{items}.

The following naming convention holds:

@itemize
@item
Procedures whose names end in @code{!} are side--effecting variants.
What values these procedures return is usually not specified.

@item
The order of common arguments is consistent across the different
procedures in the high level library, and consistent across the
different procedures in the low level library.  Arguments to some
functions in the high level library have different order from the one of
the homologous low level functions.

@item
Procedures that have left/right directional variants use the following
convention:

@multitable {right--to--left} {Suffix}
@headitem Direction @tab Suffix
@item left-to-right @tab @meta{none}
@item right-to-left @tab --right
@item both @tab --both
@end multitable
@end itemize

In the procedure specifications:

@itemize
@item
A @var{V} argument is a vector view, which is expanded by a macro in a
triplet of values: the vector, the index of the first value in the
selected subvector, the index of the value past the last in the selected
position.  @ref{vectors views} for details.

@item
A @var{vec} argument is a vector.

@item
The @var{start} and @var{past} arguments are half--open vector indices
specifying a subvector within a vector argument; when unspecified, they
default to zero and the length of the vector, respectively.  When
specified, it must be the case that:

@example
0 <= start <= past <= (vector-length s)
@end example

@noindent
for the corresponding argument @var{vec}.  They typically restrict a
procedure's action to the indicated subvector; when @var{start} equals
@var{past} the selected subvector is the empty vector.

@item
A @var{pred} argument is a unary value predicate procedure,
returning a true/false value when applied to a value.

@item
A @var{item=} argument is a binary function applied to two items, it
must return true when they are equal, false otherwise.

@item
A @var{item<} argument is a binary function applied to two items, it
must return true when the first is less than the second, false
otherwise.

@item
An @var{i} or @var{k} argument is an exact non--negative integer
specifying an index into a vector.

@item
The @var{len} and @var{nvalues} arguments are exact non--negative
integers specifying a length of a vector or some number of values.

@item
An @var{obj} argument can be any value.
@end itemize

An argument followed by @code{...} means zero--or--more elements.  So
the procedure with the signature:

@example
sum-squares x ...
@end example

@noindent
takes zero or more arguments (@var{x}, @dots{}), while the procedure
with signature:

@example
spell-check doc dict1 dict2 ...
@end example

@noindent
takes two mandatory arguments (@var{doc} and @var{dict1}) and zero or
more optional arguments (@var{dict2} ...).

If a procedure is said to return ``unspecified'', this means that
nothing at all is known about what the procedure returns.  Such a
procedure is not even required to be consistent from call to call.  It
is simply required to return a value (or values) that may be passed to a
command continuation, e.g. as the value of an expression appearing as a
non--terminal subform of a begin expression.

@c page
@node vectors views
@section Views over vectors


Vector views are syntactic sugar to allow subvector specification with
minimum overhead.  Many low level vector functions act on subvectors
specified with triplets of arguments:

@itemize
@item
The full vector.

@item
The @dfn{start index}: The index of the first item in the selected
subvector.

@item
The @dfn{past index}: The index of the item past the last item in the
selected subvector.
@end itemize

To select the subvector @code{#(2 3 4)} from the vector @code{#(0 1 2 3
4 5 6)} we have to determine the half--open range of items, which is
@math{[2, 5)}, then apply a function to the arguments:

@example
(%the-function '#(0 1 2 3 4 5 6) 2 5)
@end example

@noindent
while to select the whole vector we can do:

@example
(%the-function '#(0 1 2 3 4 5 6) 0 7)
@end example

@noindent
or:

@example
(let ((vec '#(0 1 2 3 4 5 6)))
  (%the-function vec 0 (vector-length vec)))
@end example

With the vector views implemented by @library{vectors}, the low level
function is wrapped by a high level syntax which can be invoked as:

@example
(the-function '#(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7))
        ; select the whole vector

(the-function (view '#(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7)))
        ; select the whole vector

(the-function (view '#(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7)
                (start 3)))
        ; select the subvector [3, 8)

(the-function (view '#(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7)
                (start 3)
                (past 6)))
        ; select the subvector [3, 6)

(the-function (view '#(0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7)
                (past 5)))
        ; select the subvector [0, 5)
@end example

@noindent
instead of a triplet of arguments, the vector view is a single argument
that can be:

@table @code
@item @meta{vector}
@itemx (view @meta{vector})
The vector itself or an unquoted list holding the vector itself,
prefixed by the @code{view} auxiliary syntax: It selects the whole
vector.

@itemx (view @meta{vector} (start @meta{start-index}))
An unquoted list holding the vector and the start index, with auxiliary
syntaxes @code{view} and @code{start}: It selects the subvector from the
start index to the end.

@item (view @meta{vector} (past @meta{past-index}))
An unquoted list holding the vector and the past index, with auxiliary
syntaxes @code{view} and @code{past}: It selects the subvector from zero
to the selected past index.

@itemx (view @meta{vector} (start @meta{start-index}) (past @meta{past-index}))
An unquoted list holding the vector, the start index and the past index,
with auxiliary syntaxes @code{view}, @code{start} and @code{past}: It
selects the subvector between the start and past indexes.
@end table

@noindent
@code{@meta{vector}}, @code{@meta{start-index}} and
@code{@meta{past-index}} can be arbitrary Scheme expressions.  High
level macros accepting two or more subvectors as arguments, support
vector views for all of them.  When we are concerned with the overhead
of vector views, we can use the low level functions directly.

In the following documentation: Low level functions and high level
macros are documented together; only the meaning of arguments to the low
level function are described, the meaning of high level arguments is
obvious.

@c page
@node vectors cons
@section Constructors


@defun vector-concatenate @var{vector-list}
Append the elements of @var{vector-list} together into a single vector.
Guaranteed to return a freshly allocated vector.
@end defun


@deffn Function %vector-concatenate-reverse @var{vector-list} @var{final-vector} @var{nvalues}
@deffnx Macro vector-concatenate-reverse @var{vector-list}
@deffnx Macro vector-concatenate-reverse @var{vector-list} @var{final-vector}
@deffnx Macro vector-concatenate-reverse @var{vector-list} @var{final-vector} @var{nvalues}
Reverse @var{vector-list} then concatenate the elements, which must be
vectors.  The first @var{nvalues} items in @var{final-vector} are consed
onto the beginning of @var{vector-list} before performing the the
reversal and concatenation operations.

@var{final-vector} defaults to the empty vector and @var{nvalues}
defaults to the length of @var{final-vector}.

This procedure is useful in the construction of procedures that
accumulate data into lists of vector buffers, and wish to convert the
accumulated data into a single vector when done.
@end deffn


@defun Function vector-append @var{vec} ...
Return a newly allocated vector that contains all elements in order from
the subsequent locations in the vector arguments.

@example
(vector-append '#(x) '#(y))
@result{} #(x y)

(vector-append '#(a) '#(b c d))
@result{} #(a b c d)

(vector-append '#(a #(b)) '#(#(c)))
@result{} #(a #(b) #(c))
@end example
@end defun


@defun vector-tabulate @var{integer->item} @var{len}
Construct a vector of size @var{len} by applying @var{integer->item} to
each index from zero (included) to @var{len} (excluded), in increasing
order, to produce the corresponding vector element.
@end defun

@c page
@node vectors pred
@section Predicates


@defun vector-null? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is the empty vector, otherwise return
@false{}.
@end defun


@deffn Function %vector-every @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %vector-any @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-every @var{pred} @var{V}
@deffnx Macro vector-any @var{pred} @var{V}
Check to see if the given predicate is true on every/any item in
@var{vec}, proceeding from left (index @var{start}) to right (index
@var{past}).  If the selected subvector is empty, the return value is
@false{}.

The predicate is ``witness--generating'':

@itemize
@item
If @func{vector-any} returns true: The returned true value is the one
produced by the application of the predicate.

@item
If @func{vector-every} returns true: The returned true value is the one
produced by the application of the predicate to the last item in the
subvector.
@end itemize

If the predicate is applied to the final item of the selected subvector,
that final application is a tail call.

The names of these procedures do not end with a question mark; this is
to indicate that they do not return a simple boolean (@true{} or
@false{}), but a general value.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors compar
@section Comparison


@deffn Function %vector-compare @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{vec1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{beg2} @var{past2} @var{proc<} @var{proc=} @var{proc>}
@deffnx Macro vector-compare @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{V1} @var{V2} @var{proc<} @var{proc=} @var{proc>}
Determine the @dfn{mismatch index} between the two subvectors: the
largest index @math{i} such that for every @math{0 <= j < i},
@math{vec1[j] = vec2[j]}; that is, @math{i} is the first position that
does not match.

The mismatch index is always an index into @var{vec1}; in the case of
equal vectors, it is always @var{past1}; the functions observe the
protocol in this redundant case for uniformity.

The items before the mismatch index are tested for equality using
@var{item=}; the items at the mismatch index are also compared using
@var{item<}, to determine the smallest.

@var{proc<}, @var{proc=}, or @var{proc>} are applied to the mismatch
index (not item), depending upon whether the subvector of @var{vec1} is
less than, equal to, or greater than the subvector of @var{vec2}.  The
result of the application is returned.

If we just want to have the mismatch index as return value: We can use
@func{values} as value for @var{proc<}, @var{proc=} and @var{proc>}.
Another interesting option is to use @code{(lambda (mismatch-index) #f)}
or @code{(lambda (mismatch-index) #t)}.

Examples:

@example
(vector-compare '#(0 1 2 3) '#(0 1 2 3) values values values)
@result{} 4

(vector-compare '#(0 1 2 3) '#(0 1 2 3) values values values)
@result{} 4
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector= @var{item=} @var{vec1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector= @var{item=} @var{V1} @var{V2}
Compare two subvectors: Return true if they are equal according to
@var{item=}, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector<> @var{item=} @var{vec1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector<> @var{item=} @var{V1} @var{V1}
Compare two subvectors: Return @false{} if they are equal according to
@var{item=}, true otherwise.
@end deffn


The following predicates compare two subvectors according to the
following rules:

@enumerate
@item
Two subvectors are equal if: they have the same length and all their
items are equal according to @var{item=}.

@item
A subvector @var{V1} is less than @var{V2} if:

@itemize
@item
@var{V1} is shorter than @var{V2} and the all the items in @var{V1} are
equal to the corresponding items in @var{V2} according to @var{item=}.

@item
The items in @var{V1} and @var{V2} are equal up to a certain index
according to @var{item=}, and the item at the mismatch index in @var{V1}
is less than the corresponding item in @var{V2} according to
@var{item<}.
@end itemize

@item
A subvector @var{V1} is greater than @var{V2} if:

@itemize
@item
@var{V1} is longer than @var{V2} and the all the items in @var{V1} are
equal to the corresponding items in @var{V2} according to @var{item=}.

@item
The items in @var{V1} and @var{V2} are equal up to a certain index
according to @var{item=}, and the item at the mismatch index in @var{V1}
is greater than the corresponding item in @var{V2} according to
@var{item<}.
@end itemize
@end enumerate


@deffn Function %vector< @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{vec1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector< @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{V1} @var{V2}
Compare two subvectors: Return true if the first is less than the
second, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector<= @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{vec1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector<= @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{V1} @var{V2}
Compare two subvectors: Return true if the first is less than, or equal
to, the second; @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector> @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{vec1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector> @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{V1} @var{V2}
Compare two subvectors: Return true if the first is greater than the
second, @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector>= @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{vec1} @var{beg1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{beg2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector>= @var{item=} @var{item<} @var{V1} @var{V2}
Compare two subvectors: Return true if the first is greater than, or
equal to, the second; @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors fold
@section Fold and unfold


@menu
* vectors fold rnrs::           Folding with @rnrs{6} style.
* vectors fold sub::            Folding over subvectors.
* vectors fold unfold::         Unfolding vectors.
* vectors fold map::            Mapping functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node vectors fold rnrs
@subsection Folding with @rnrs{6} style


@deffn Function vector-fold-left @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Function vector-fold-right @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-fold-left/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-fold-right/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Fold the function @var{combine} over the vector arguments, which must
have the same length.  The return value is the return value of the last
evaluated call to @var{combine}; if all the vector arguments are empty,
the return value is @var{knil}.  The syntaxes may be a little faster in
the multiple vector arguments case.

The left--folding variants iterate @var{combine} left--to--right over each
element of equal index in all the vectors; @var{combine} is applied as:

@example
(@var{combine} @var{state}
  (vector-ref @var{vec0} @var{idx})
  (vector-ref @var{vec}  @var{idx})
  )
@end example

@noindent
where @var{state} is the current state value, and it is the
@strong{first} argument; the current state value begins with @var{knil},
and becomes whatever @var{combine} returned at the respective iteration.

The right--folding variants iterate @var{combine} right--to--left over each
element of equal index in all the vectors; @var{combine} is applied as:

@example
(@var{combine}
  (vector-ref @var{vec0} @var{idx})
  (vector-ref @var{vec}  @var{idx})
  
  @var{state})
@end example

@noindent
in which @var{state} is the @strong{last} argument.
@end deffn


@deffn Function vector-fold-left* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Function vector-fold-right* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-fold-left*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-fold-right*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Like the above functions, but accept vectors of different length,
iterating until the end of the shortest.
@end deffn


@defun vector-fold-left/with-index @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@defunx vector-fold-left*/with-index @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@defunx vector-fold-right/with-index @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@defunx vector-fold-right*/with-index @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Folding operators variants which apply @var{combine} using the index of the
current elements as first argument.  For the left--folding operators:

@example
(@var{combine} @var{idx} @var{state}
  (vector-ref @var{vec0} @var{idx})
  (vector-ref @var{vec}  @var{idx})
  )
@end example

@noindent
for the right--folding operators:

@example
(@var{combine} @var{idx}
  (vector-ref @var{vec0} @var{idx})
  (vector-ref @var{vec}  @var{idx})
  
  @var{state})
@end example

Here is a possible implementation for @func{vector-map!}:

@example
(define (vector-map! proc vec0 . vectors)
  (apply vector-fold-left/with-index
         (lambda (index state . items)
           (vector-set! state index (apply proc index items))
           state)
         vec0 vec0 vectors))
@end example
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deffn Function vector-and-fold-left @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Function vector-and-fold-left* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Function vector-and-fold-right @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Function vector-and-fold-right* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-and-fold-left/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-and-fold-left*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-and-fold-right/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-and-fold-right*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Like the functions above, but stop the iteration if @var{combine}
returns @false{}.  The return value is the return value of the last
evaluated call to @var{combine}; if all the vector arguments are empty,
the return value is @var{knil}.

These functions can be used to implement functions like
@func{vector-every}:

@example
(define (vector-every pred vec0 . vectors)
  (apply vector-and-fold-left (lambda (state . items)
                                (apply pred items))
         #t ;must be true
         (cons vec0 vectors)))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function vector-or-fold-left @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Function vector-or-fold-left* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Function vector-or-fold-right @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Function vector-or-fold-right* @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-or-fold-left/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-or-fold-left*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-or-fold-right/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-or-fold-right*/stx @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Like the functions above, but stop the iteration if @var{combine}
returns true as state.  The return value is the return value of the last
evaluated call to @var{combine}.  If all the vectors are empty, the
return value is @var{knil}.

These functions can be used to implement functions like
@func{vector-any}:

@example
(define (vector-any pred vec0 . vectors)
  (apply vector-or-fold-left (lambda (state . items)
                               (apply pred items))
         #f ;must be false
         (cons vec0 vectors)))
@end example
@end deffn


@defun vector-fold-left/pred @var{pred} @var{knil} @var{vec}
Apply @var{pred} to adjacent couples of elements from @var{vec}; return
true if all the evaluations of @var{pred} were true.  The iteration
stops at the first @false{} return value from @var{pred}.

This function is implemented as:

@example
(define (fold-left/pred pred knil ell)
  (vector-and-fold-left/stx (lambda (state item)
                              (and (pred state item) item))
     knil ell))
@end example

@noindent
and it can be used to implement predicates for ordering like @func{<}:

@example
(vector-fold-left/pred < 0 '(1 2 3 4 5 6))
@result{} 6

(vector-fold-left/pred < 0 '(1 2 3 -4 5 6))
@result{} #f
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node vectors fold sub
@subsection Folding over subvectors


@deffn Function %subvector-fold-left @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %subvector-fold-right @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro subvector-fold-left @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{S}
@deffnx Macro subvector-fold-right @var{combine} @var{knil} @var{S}
Fold @var{combine} over each item of the selected subvector, return the
return value of the last evaluated call to @var{combine}; if the
selected subvector is empty, the return value is @var{knil}.  The
left--fold operator builds the return value as:

@example
(@var{combine}
  (@var{combine}
        ...
        (@var{combine}
           (@var{combine}
              (vector-ref @var{vec} @var{start})
              @var{knil})
           (vector-ref @var{vec} (+ @var{start} 1)))
        ...
    (vector-ref @var{vec} (- @var{past} 2)))
    ...
  (vector-ref @var{vec} (- @var{past} 1)))
@end example

@noindent
the right--fold iterator builds the return value as:

@example
(@var{combine}
  (vector-ref @var{vec} @var{start}
  (@var{combine}
    (vector-ref @var{vec} (+ @var{start} 1))
    ...
      (@var{combine}
        (vector-ref @var{vec} (- @var{past} 3))
        (@var{combine}
           (vector-ref @var{vec} (- @var{past} 2))
           (@var{combine}
              (vector-ref @var{vec} (- @var{past} 1))
              @var{knil})))))
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors fold unfold
@subsection Unfolding vectors


@defun vector-unfold @var{stop?} @var{seed->item} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed}
@defunx vector-unfold @var{stop?} @var{seed->item} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed} @var{base-vector}
@defunx vector-unfold @var{stop?} @var{seed->item} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed} @var{base-vector} @var{make-final}
This is a fundamental constructor for vectors.  Arguments description
follows.

@table @var
@item make-seed
A map function used to generate a series of ``seed'' values from the
initial seed:

@example
@var{first-seed}
(@var{make-seed} @var{first-seed})            @result{} seed2
(@var{make-seed} seed2)                 @result{} seed3
(@var{make-seed} seed3)                 @result{} seed4
...
@end example

@item stop?
A predicate function telling when to stop generating items: When it
returns true when applied to one of the seed values.

@item seed->item
Map function mapping each seed value to the corresponding item in
the result vector.  These items are assembled into the vector in a
left--to--right order.

@item base
An optional vector which is used as initial/leftmost portion of the
constructed vector.  Defaults to the empty vector.

@item make-final
Optional function applied to the terminal seed value (on which
@var{stop?}  returns true) to produce the final/rightmost portion of the
constructed vector.  Defaults to @code{(lambda (x) '#())}.
@end table

More precisely, the following (simple, inefficient) definitions hold:

@example
;; iterative
(define (vector-unfold stop? seed->item make-seed
                       first-seed base-vector make-final)
  (let loop ((seed    first-seed)
             (result  base-vector))
    (if (stop? seed)
        (vector-append result (make-final seed))
      (loop (make-seed seed)
            (vector-append result
                           (vector (seed->item seed)))))))

;; recursive
(define (vector-unfold stop? seed->item make-seed
                       first-seed base-vector make-final)
  (vector-append
     base-vector
     (let loop ((seed first-seed))
       (if (stop? seed)
           (make-final seed)
         (vector-append (vector (seed->item seed))
                        (loop (make-seed seed)))))))
@end example

This function is a fairly powerful vector constructor; we can use it to
convert a list to a vector, read a port into a vector, reverse a vector,
copy a vector, and so forth.  Examples:

@example
(port->vector p) = (vector-unfold eof-object? values
                                  (lambda (x) (read-item p))
                                  (read-item p))

(list->vector lis) = (vector-unfold null? car cdr lis)

(vector-tabulate f size) = (vector-unfold (lambda (i)
                                            (= i size))
                                          f add1 0)
@end example

@noindent
to map @code{proc} over a list @var{lis}, producing a vector:

@example
(vector-unfold null? (compose proc car) cdr lis)
@end example

Interested functional programmers may enjoy noting that
@func{vector-fold-right} and @func{vector-unfold} are in some sense
inverses.  That is, given operations @var{knull?}, @var{kar}, @var{kdr},
@var{combine}, and @var{knil} satisfying:

@example
(combine (kar x) (kdr x)) @result{} x
(knull? knil) @result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
then:

@example
(vector-fold-right combine knil
                   (vector-unfold knull? kar kdr x))
@result{} x
@end example

@noindent
and:

@example
(vector-unfold knull? kar kdr
               (vector-fold-right combine knil s))
@result{} s
@end example

The final vector constructed does not share storage with either
@var{base-vector} or the value produced by @var{make-final}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@defun vector-unfold-right @var{stop?} @var{seed->item} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed}
@defunx vector-unfold-right @var{stop?} @var{seed->item} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed} @var{base-vector}
@defunx vector-unfold-right @var{stop?} @var{seed->item} @var{make-seed} @var{first-seed} @var{base-vector} @var{make-final}
This is a fundamental constructor for vectors.  The arguments are like
the ones of @func{vector-unfold}.  The difference from
@func{vector-unfold} is that this function builds the vector from right
to left; more precisely, the following (simple, inefficient) definitions
hold:

@example
;; iterative
(define (vector-unfold-right
           stop? seed->item make-seed
           first-seed base-vector make-final)
  (let lp ((seed    first-seed)
           (result  base))
    (if (stop? seed)
        (vector-append (make-final seed) result)
      (loop (make-seed seed)
            (vector-append (vector (seed->item seed))
                           result)))))

;; recursive
(define (vector-unfold-right
           stop? seed->item make-seed
           first-seed base-vector make-final)
  (vector-append
     (let loop ((seed first-seed))
       (if (stop? seed)
           (make-final seed)
         (vector-append (loop (make-seed seed))
                        (vector (seed->item seed)))))
     base))
@end example

Interested functional programmers may enjoy noting that
@func{vector-fold} and @func{vector-unfold-right} are in some sense
inverses.  That is, given operations @var{knull?}, @var{kar}, @var{kdr},
@var{kons}, and @var{knil} satisfying:

@example
(kons (kar x) (kdr x)) @result{} x
(knull? knil) @result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
then:

@example
(vector-fold kons knil
             (vector-unfold-right knull? kar kdr x))
@result{} x
@end example

@noindent
and:

@example
(vector-unfold-right knull? kar kdr
                     (vector-fold kons knil s))
@result{} s
@end example

The final vector constructed does not share storage with either
@var{base-vector} or the value produced by @func{make-final}.
@end defun

@c page
@node vectors fold map
@subsection Mapping functions


All the functions described here map their @var{proc} function argument
over all the elements of the vector arguments, or the subvector
argument, from zero to the end in increasing order.  In all the
following descriptions:

@itemize
@item
Functions and syntaxes whose main name portion ends without a @code{!},
build and return a new vector, storing into it the results of mapping
@var{proc}.

@item
Functions and syntaxes whose main name portion ends with a @code{!},
mutate their @var{vec0} vector argument, storing into it the results of
mapping @var{proc}.

@item
Functions and syntaxes whose main name portion ends without a @code{*},
accept only vector arguments of equal length.

@item
Functions and syntaxes whose main name portion ends with a @code{*},
accept vector arguments of different length, stopping the iteration at
the end of the shortest.

@item
Functions whose name ends without the @code{/with-index} suffix, apply
their @var{proc} function argument as:

@example
(@var{proc}
  (vector-ref @var{vec0} @var{idx})
  (vector-ref @var{vec}  @var{idx})
  ...)
@end example

@item
Functions whose name ends with the @code{/with-index} suffix, apply
their @var{proc} function argument as:

@example
(@var{proc} @var{idx}
  (vector-ref @var{vec0} @var{idx})
  (vector-ref @var{vec}  @var{idx})
  ...)
@end example

@noindent
where @var{idx} is the index current element.
@end itemize


@defun vector-map* @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@defunx vector-map/with-index @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@defunx vector-map*/with-index @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Build and return a new vector holding the return values of mapping
@var{proc} over all the elements of the vector arguments.
@end defun


@defun vector-map! @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@defunx vector-map*! @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@defunx vector-map!/with-index @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@defunx vector-map*!/with-index @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Mutate @var{vec0} setting its elements to the return values of mapping
@var{proc} over all the elements of the vector arguments.
@end defun


@defun vector-for-each* @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@defunx vector-for-each*/with-index @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Apply @var{proc} over all the elements of the vector arguments.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Mapping over subvectors

@deffn Function %subvector-map @var{proc} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %subvector-map/with-index @var{proc} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro subvector-map @var{proc} @var{S}
@deffnx Macro subvector-map/with-index @var{proc} @var{S}
Build and return a new vector mapping @var{proc} over the items in the
selected subvector of @var{vec}, from index @var{start} to index
@var{past} in increasing order.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %subvector-map! @var{proc} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %subvector-map!/with-index @var{proc} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro subvector-map! @var{proc} @var{S}
@deffnx Macro subvector-map!/with-index @var{proc} @var{S}
Mutate the selected subvector of @var{vec}, mapping @var{proc} over its
items from index @var{start} to index @var{past} in increasing order.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %subvector-for-each @var{proc} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %subvector-for-each/with-index @var{proc} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro subvector-for-each @var{proc} @var{V}
@deffnx Macro subvector-for-each/with-index @var{proc} @var{V}
Apply @var{proc} to each item in the selected subvector of @var{vec},
from index @var{start} to index @var{past} in increasing order.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %subvector-for-each-index @var{proc} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro subvector-for-each-index @var{proc} @var{V}
Apply @var{proc} to each index in the selected subvector of @var{vec},
from index @var{start} to index @var{past} in increasing order.  This is
simply a method of looping over a vector that is guaranteed to be safe
and correct.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Syntax variants

The following syntaxes are like the corresponding functions.  They can
be a little faster when multiple vector arguments are present.


@deffn Syntax vector-map/stx @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-map*/stx @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Like @func{vector-map} and @func{vector-map*}, but implemented as a
syntax.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax vector-map!/stx @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-map*!/stx @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Like @func{vector-map!} and @func{vector-map*!}, but implemented as a
syntax.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax vector-for-each/stx @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
@deffnx Syntax vector-for-each*/stx @var{proc} @var{vec0} @var{vec} ...
Like @func{vector-for-each} and @func{vector-for-each*}, but implemented
as a syntax.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors select
@section Selection


@deffn Function %vector-copy @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function subvector @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro subvector* @var{V}
@deffnx Macro vector-copy @var{V}
Build and return a new vector holding the selected subvector of
@var{vec}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-reverse-copy @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-reverse-copy @var{V}
Like @func{%vector-copy}, but copy the elements in the reverse order
from the selected subvector of @var{vec}.

@example
(vector-reverse-copy (view '#(5 4 3 2 1 0)
                       (start 1)
                       (past  5)))
@result{} #(1 2 3 4)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-copy! @var{dst-vec} @var{dst-start} @var{src-vec} @var{src-start} @var{src-past}
@deffnx Macro vector-copy! @var{dst-V} @var{src-V}
Write the selected source subvector into the selected destination
subvector.  This function supports copying over the same vector.

The selected destination subvector starts at @var{dst-start} in
@var{dst-vec} and may extend until the end of the vector.  In the
destination vector view @var{dst-V}: If a past index is specified, it is
ignored.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-reverse-copy! @var{dst-vec} @var{dst-start} @var{src-vec} @var{src-start} @var{src-past}
@deffnx Macro vector-reverse-copy! @var{V-dst} @var{V-src}
Like @func{%vector-copy!}, but this copies the elements in the reverse
order.  This function supports copying over the same vector.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-take @var{nitems} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %vector-take-right @var{nitems} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-take @var{V} @var{nitems}
@deffnx Macro vector-take-right @var{V} @var{nitems}
Return the first or last @var{nitems} of the selected subvector.  These
functions always return a newly allocated vector.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-drop @var{nitems} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %vector-drop-right @var{nitems} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-drop @var{V} @var{nitems}
@deffnx Macro vector-drop-right @var{V} @var{nitems}
Drop the first or last @var{nitems} of the selected subvector and return
the resulting vector.  These functions always return a newly allocated
vector.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors pad
@section Padding and trimming


@deffn Function %vector-pad @var{requested-len} @var{fill-item} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %vector-pad-right @var{requested-len} @var{fill-item} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-pad @var{V} @var{requested-len}
@deffnx Macro vector-pad @var{V} @var{requested-len} @var{fill-item}
@deffnx Macro vector-pad-right @var{V} @var{requested-len}
@deffnx Macro vector-pad-right @var{V} @var{requested-len} @var{fill-item}
Build a vector of length @var{requested-len} comprised of @var{vec}
padded on the left or right by as many occurrences of the item
@var{fill-item} as needed.  Always return a newly allocated vector.

If @var{vec} has more than @var{requested-len} items, it is truncated on
the left or right to length @var{requested-len}.  For the macros:
@var{fill-item} defaults to @false{}.

@example
(vector-pad '#(1 2 3))           @result{} #(#f #f 1 2 3)
(vector-pad '#(1 2 3 4 5) 5)     @result{} #(1 2 3 4 5)
(vector-pad '#(9 9 1 2 3 4 5) 5) @result{} #(1 2 3 4 5)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-trim @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %vector-trim-right @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %vector-trim-both @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-trim @var{V} @var{pred}
@deffnx Macro vector-trim-right @var{V} @var{pred}
@deffnx Macro vector-trim-both @var{V} @var{pred}
Trim the selected subvector of @var{vec} by skipping over all items on
the left/on the right/on both sides that satisfy @var{pred}: A test
predicate that is applied to the items in @var{vec}, an item causing it
to return true is skipped.

Always return a newly allocated vector.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors prefix
@section Prefixes and suffixes


@deffn Function %vector-prefix-length @var{vec1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector-prefix-length @var{V1} @var{V2}
Return the length of the longest common prefix of the two subvectors.
This is equivalent to the mismatch index for the vectors (modulo the
start index offsets).
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-suffix-length @var{vec1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector-suffix-length @var{V1} @var{V2}
Return the length of the longest common suffix of the two subvectors.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-prefix? @var{vec1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector-prefix? @var{V1} @var{V2}
Return @true{} if the selected subvector of @var{vec1} is a prefix of
the selected subvector of @var{vec2}, otherwise return @false{}.  Notice
that the empty vector is a prefix of every vector.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-suffix? @var{vec1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector-suffix? @var{V1} @var{V2}
Return @true{} if the selected subvector of @var{vec1} is a suffix of
the selected subvector of @var{vec2}, otherwise return @false{}.  Notice
that the empty vector is @strong{not} a suffix of every vector.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors search
@section Searching


@deffn Function %vector-index @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %vector-index-right @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-index @var{V} @var{pred}
@deffnx Macro vector-index-right @var{V} @var{pred}
Search through the subvector from the left or right, returning the index
of the first occurrence of an item which satisfies the predicate
@var{pred}.  If no match is found: Return @false{}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-skip @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %vector-skip-right @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-skip @var{V} @var{pred}
@deffnx Macro vector-skip-right @var{V} @var{pred}
Search through the vector from the left or right, returning the index of
the first occurrence of an item which does not satisfy the predicate
@var{pred}.  If no match is found: Return @false{}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-count @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-count @var{V} @var{pred}
Return a count of the number of items in @var{vec} that satisfy the
@var{pred} argument.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-contains @var{vec1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector-contains @var{V1} @var{V2}
Return true if the selected subvector of @var{vec1} contains the
selected subvector of @var{vec2}, else return @false{}.  The return
value is the index in @var{vec1} where the subvector of @var{vec2}
occurs.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-binary-search @var{obj} @var{cmp} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-binary-search @var{V} @var{obj} @var{cmp}
Similar to @func{vector-index} and @func{vector-index-right}, but
instead of searching left to right or right to left, perform a binary
search.  @var{cmp} should be a procedure of two arguments and return:

@itemize
@item
A negative integer, indicating that its first argument is less than its
second.

@item
Zero, indicating that they are equal.

@item
A positive integer, indicating that the first argument is greater than
the second argument.
@end itemize

An example @var{cmp} might be:

@example
(lambda (char1 char2)
  (cond ((char<? char1 char2) -1)
        ((char=? char1 char2)  0)
        (else                  1)))
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors filter
@section Filtering and deleting


@deffn Function %vector-filter @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-filter @var{V} @var{pred}
Filter the selected subvector, retaining only those characters that
satisfy the @var{pred} argument.  Always return a newly allocated
vector.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-delete @var{pred} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-delete @var{V} @var{pred}
Filter the selected subvector, retaining only those characters that do
@strong{not} satisfy the @var{pred} argument.  Always return a newly
allocated vector.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors list
@section List and vector conversion


@deffn Function %vector->list* @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector->list* @var{V}
Return a newly allocated list of the items that make up the given
subvector.  This is an extension of the @func{vector->list} function
that adds support for subvectors.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %reverse-vector->list @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro reverse-vector->list @var{V}
Like @func{%vector->list*} but reverses the order of the items from the
subvector.
@end deffn


@defun reverse-list->vector @var{char-list}
Reverse the given list of items, then compose a vector with the
result.

@example
(reverse-list->vector '(#\a #\B #\c))
@result{} #(#\c #\B #\a)
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node vectors replicate
@section Replicate and rotate


@deffn Function %xsubvector @var{from} @var{to} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro xsubvector @var{V} @var{from} @var{to}
Extended subvector procedure replicating the selected subvector ``up and
down'' index space, in both the positive and negative directions.

The call:

@example
(%xsubvector from to '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f #\g) 3 6)
@end example

@noindent
selects the subvector @code{#(#\d #\e #\f)} and defines the conceptual
bidirectionally--infinite vector:

@example
...  e  f  d  e  f  d  e  f  d  e  f ...
... -5 -4 -3 -2 -1  0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 ...
                    ^
@end example

@noindent
that is @code{#(#\d #\e #\f)} repeated in both directions.
@func{%xsubvector} returns the subvector of this vector beginning at
index @var{from}, and ending at @var{to}.

We can use this function to perform a variety of tasks:

@itemize
@item
To replicate a vector:

@example
(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c) 0 7)
@result{} #(#\a #\b #\c #\a #\b #\c #\a)
@end example

@item
To rotate a vector left:

@example
(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) 1  7)
@result{} #(#\b #\c #\d #\e #\f #\a)

(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) 2  8)
@result{} #(#\c #\d #\e #\f #\a #\b)

(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) 3  9)
@result{} #(#\d #\e #\f #\a #\b #\c)

(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) 4 10)
@result{} #(#\e #\f #\a #\b #\c #\d)

(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) 5 11)
@result{} #(#\f #\a #\b #\c #\d #\e)
@end example

@item
To rotate a vector right:

@example
(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) -1 5)
@result{} #(#\f #\a #\b #\c #\d #\e)

(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) -2 4)
@result{} #(#\e #\f #\a #\b #\c #\d)

(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) -3 3)
@result{} #(#\d #\e #\f #\a #\b #\c)

(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) -4 2)
@result{} #(#\c #\d #\e #\f #\a #\b)

(xsubvector '#(#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f) -5 1)
@result{} #(#\b #\c #\d #\e #\f #\a)
@end example
@end itemize

Note that:

@itemize
@item
The @var{from}/@var{to} indices give a half--open range; the items from
index @var{from} up to, but not including, index @var{to}.

@item
The @var{from}/@var{to} indices are not in terms of the index space for
vector @var{vec}.  They are in terms of the replicated index space of
the subvector defined by @var{vec}, @var{start}, and @var{past}.
@end itemize

It is an error if @var{start} equals @var{past}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function xvector-xcopy! @var{from} @var{to} @var{target} @var{target-start} @var{source} @var{source-start} @var{source-past}
@deffnx Macro vector-xcopy! @var{target-S} @var{source-S} @var{from} @var{to}
Exactly the same as @func{%xsubvector}, but the extracted text is
written into the selected subvector of @var{target}.

This operation is not defined if @code{(eq? target start)}; we cannot
copy a vector on top of itself.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors mutate
@section Mutators


@defun vector-swap! @var{vec} @var{i} @var{j}
Swap the items in @var{vec} at positions @var{i} and @var{j}.
@end defun


@deffn Function %vector-fill*! @var{fill-item} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-fill*! @var{V} @var{fill-item}
Fill the selected subvector with @var{fill-item}, modifying the original
vector.
@end deffn

@c page
@node vectors misc
@section Miscellaneous functions


@deffn Function %vector-replace @var{vec1} @var{start1} @var{past1} @var{vec2} @var{start2} @var{past2}
@deffnx Macro vector-replace @var{V1} @var{V2}
Replace the selected subvector in @var{vec1} with the selected subvector
in @var{vec2}.  Return a newly allocated vector.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %vector-reverse @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Function %vector-reverse! @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro vector-reverse @var{V}
@deffnx Macro vector-reverse! @var{V}
Reverse the vector.  @func{%vector-reverse} returns the result vector
and does not alter its @var{vec} parameter.  @func{%vector-reverse!} is
the in--place side--effecting variant.
@end deffn

@c page
@node arrays
@chapter Multidimensional arrays


The @library{arrays} library implements mutidimensional arrays on top of
built--in Scheme vectors.


@menu
* arrays conventions::          Arguments conventions.
* arrays layout::               Layout of elements in the vector.
* arrays position::             Specifying the coordinates of elements.
* arrays shape::                Specifying the shape of arrays.
* arrays array::                Dealing with arrays.
@end menu

@c page
@node arrays conventions
@section Arguments conventions


In the documentation of @library{arrays} we call:

@table @dfn
@item items
The values collected in Scheme's built--in lists and vectors.

@item elements
The values collected in the arrays.
@end table

The following conventions are used in the documentation of arguments to
the functions of @library{arrays}:

@table @var
@item array
A proper @code{array} object.

@item shape
A proper @code{shape} object.

@item position
A proper @code{position} object.

@item position-step
A built--in Scheme vector used to represent the difference between two
@code{position} values.

@item dimension
A strictly positive, exact integer representing the extension of a
dimension in an @code{array}.

@item index
A non--negative, exact integer representing the coordinate of an
element.

@item start
@itemx past
@itemx last
When specifying a range of items or elements: @var{start} is the
left--included bound, @var{past} is the right--included bound,
@var{last} is the right--excluded bound.

@item obj
Can be any value.
@end table

@c page
@node arrays layout
@section Layout of elements in the vector


Filling the underlying vector with integers representing the index of
the element, for an array of one dimension and four elements, the vector
is:

@example
#(0 1 2 3)
@end example

For an array of two dimensions with @math{3} rows and @math{4} columns,
we can compute the vector index by multiplying the row coordinate by the
number of columns, then adding the column coordinate:

@example
;;     coordinates   formula
#( 0   ; 0 0         0 * 4 + 0 * 1
   1   ; 0 1         0 * 4 + 1 * 1
   2   ; 0 2         0 * 4 + 2 * 1
   3   ; 0 3         0 * 4 + 3 * 1
   4   ; 1 0         1 * 4 + 0 * 1
   5   ; 1 1         1 * 4 + 1 * 1
   6   ; 1 2         1 * 4 + 2 * 1
   7   ; 1 3         1 * 4 + 3 * 1
   8   ; 2 0         2 * 4 + 0 * 1
   9   ; 2 1         2 * 4 + 1 * 1
  10   ; 2 2         2 * 4 + 2 * 1
  11)  ; 2 3         2 * 4 + 3 * 1
@end example

For an array of three dimensions with @math{2} planes, @math{3} rows and
@math{4} columns, we can compute the vector index by multiplying the
plane, row and column coordinates by the appropriate factor:

@example
;;     coordinates    formula
#( 0   ; 0 0 0        0 * (3 * 4) + 0 * 4 + 0 * 1
   1   ; 0 0 1        0 * (3 * 4) + 0 * 4 + 1 * 1
   2   ; 0 0 2        0 * (3 * 4) + 0 * 4 + 2 * 1
   3   ; 0 0 3        0 * (3 * 4) + 0 * 4 + 3 * 1
   4   ; 0 1 0        0 * (3 * 4) + 1 * 4 + 0 * 1
   5   ; 0 1 1        0 * (3 * 4) + 1 * 4 + 1 * 1
   6   ; 0 1 2        0 * (3 * 4) + 1 * 4 + 2 * 1
   7   ; 0 1 3        0 * (3 * 4) + 1 * 4 + 3 * 1
   8   ; 0 2 0        0 * (3 * 4) + 2 * 4 + 0 * 1
   9   ; 0 2 1        0 * (3 * 4) + 2 * 4 + 1 * 1
  10   ; 0 2 2        0 * (3 * 4) + 2 * 4 + 2 * 1
  11   ; 0 2 3        0 * (3 * 4) + 2 * 4 + 3 * 1
  12   ; 1 0 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 0 * 4 + 0 * 1
  13   ; 1 0 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 0 * 4 + 1 * 1
  14   ; 1 0 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 0 * 4 + 2 * 1
  15   ; 1 0 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 0 * 4 + 3 * 1
  16   ; 1 1 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 1 * 4 + 0 * 1
  17   ; 1 1 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 1 * 4 + 1 * 1
  18   ; 1 1 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 1 * 4 + 2 * 1
  19   ; 1 1 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 1 * 4 + 3 * 1
  20   ; 1 2 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 2 * 4 + 0 * 1
  21   ; 1 2 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 2 * 4 + 1 * 1
  22   ; 1 2 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 2 * 4 + 2 * 1
  23)  ; 1 2 3        1 * (3 * 4) + 2 * 4 + 3 * 1
@end example

@noindent
that is:

@example
index = plane * (3 * 4) + row * 4 + column * 1
@end example

@noindent
generalising: The rightmost coordinate is always multiplied by @math{1},
while the other are multiplied by a product between the length of the
dimensions.

Precisely, let's call @math{N} the number of dimensions of an array, and
let's index the dimensions with @math{0 <= k < N}; then: @math{D(k)} is
the length of the @math{k}-th dimension; @math{C(k)} is the @math{k}-th
coordinate of an element and @math{F(k)} is its factor.  The index
of the element is computed with:

@example
index = F(0) * C(0) + F(1) * C(1) + ... + F(N-1) * C(N-1)
@end example

@noindent
being:

@example
0 <= k < N-2   =>   F(k) = D(k+1) * D(k+2) * ... * D(N-1)

     k = N-1   =>   F(N-1) = 1
@end example

@noindent
we note explicitly that @math{D(0)} is @strong{never} used in the
computation of the factors, and that @math{D(k)} is @strong{not} used in
the computation of @math{F(k)}.

If @code{dimensions} is the list of dimensions of an array, the
followind function will compute and return the list of factors:

@example
(define (%compute-factors dimensions)
  (let loop ((dims    (cdr dimensions))
             (factors '()))
    (if (null? dims)
        (reverse (cons 1 factors))
      (loop (cdr dims)
            (cons (apply * dims) factors)))))
@end example


@c page
@node arrays position
@section Specifying the coordinates of elements


Elements' position in arrays are represented by built--in Scheme vector,
holding exact integers.


@subsubheading Constructors


@defun array-position @var{index0} @var{index} ...
Build and return a new vector holding the @var{index} arguments.  The
indexes are checked to be exact integers.  The number of arguments is
meant to be equal to the number of dimensions of the array with which
the position value will be used.
@end defun


@subsubheading Predicates and assertions


@defun array-position? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a vector holding exact integers.
@end defun


@defun assert-array-position @var{obj} @var{func-name}
@defunx assert-array-position/or-false @var{obj} @var{func-name}
Raise an assertion violation exception if @var{obj} satisfies
@func{array-position?}, or it is @false{}.  @var{func-name} is used
@code{who} argument for the exception.  Return @true{} if no exception
is raised.
@end defun


@subsubheading Conversion


@defun array-position->string @var{position}
Return a string representation of @var{position}, specialised for array
positions.
@end defun


@subsubheading Port output


@defun array-position-display @var{position}
@defunx array-position-display @var{position} @var{port}
Write to @var{port} a human readable string representation of
@var{position}.  @var{port} defaults to the current output port.
@end defun


@defun array-position-write @var{position}
@defunx array-position-write @var{position} @var{port}
Write to @var{port} a string representation of @var{position} such that
it can be read back with @func{read}.  @var{port} defaults to the
current output port.
@end defun

@c page
@node arrays shape
@section Specifying the shape of arrays


Values of type @code{shape} represent the shape of an array, that is:
the number of dimensions, the start index of each dimension, the past
index of each dimension.  @code{shape} values are disjoint from the
other values.


@subsubheading Constructors


@defun array-shape @var{start-list} @var{past-list}
Build and return a new @code{shape} describing an array or array view
through the list of start indexes in @var{start-list} and the list of
past indexes in @var{past-list}.

The arguments must have the same length and be composed by
non--negative, exact integers.  Indexes from the arguments are taken in
couples: The first start with the first past, the second start with the
second past, and so on.  Each couple describes the range of valid
indexes for each dimension of an array.
@end defun


@subsubheading Predicates and assertions


@defun array-shape? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a @code{shape} value.
@end defun


@defun assert-array-shape @var{obj} @var{func-name}
@defunx assert-array-shape/or-false @var{obj} @var{func-name}
Raise an assertion violation exception if @var{obj} is not a
@code{shape} value, or @false{}.  @var{func-name} is used @code{who}
argument for the exception.  Return @true{} if no exception is raised.
@end defun


@subsubheading Comparison and set operations


@defun array-shape=? @var{shape0} @var{shape} ...
Return @true{} if the arguments have equal number of dimensions and hold
the same indexes.
@end defun


@defun array-supershape? @var{shape0} @var{shape} ...
@defunx array-supershape?/strict @var{shape0} @var{shape} ...
Return @true{} if the arguments, in the given order, are supershapes of
each other or strict supershapes of each other.  The shape @var{a} is
supershape of @var{b} if:

@enumerate
@item
They have the same number of dimensions.

@item
For each dimension, the range of elements in @var{b} is a subset of the
range of elements in @var{a}.
@end enumerate

The following two forms are equivalent:

@example
(array-supershape? a b c d)
(and (array-supershape? a b)
     (array-supershape? b c)
     (array-supershape? c d))
@end example
@end defun


@defun array-subshape? @var{shape0} @var{shape} ...
@defunx array-subshape?/strict @var{shape0} @var{shape} ...
Return @true{} if the arguments, in the given order, are subshapes of
each other or strict subshapes of each other.  These functions are like
the supershape functions with the arguments reversed.
@end defun


@defun array-shape-contains? @var{shape} @var{position}
Return @true{} if @var{position} selects an array element in the range
of elements described by @var{shape}.
@end defun


@subsubheading Inspection


@defun array-shape-number-of-dimensions @var{shape}
Return the number of dimensions of the array with which the shape
value will be used.
@end defun


@defun array-shape-number-of-elements @var{shape}
Return the number of elements in the range described by @var{shape}.
@end defun


@defun array-shape-index-start @var{shape} @var{dimension}
@defunx array-shape-index-past @var{shape} @var{dimension}
@defunx array-shape-index-last @var{shape} @var{dimension}
Return the start, past or last value for position indexes in @var{shape}
for the selected @var{dimension} (zero based).  Examples:

@example
(define s (array-shape '(-1  2 5)
                       '( 5 18 7)))

(array-shape-index-start s 0) @result{} -1
(array-shape-index-past  s 0) @result{}  5
(array-shape-index-last  s 0) @result{}  4

(array-shape-index-start s 1) @result{}  2
(array-shape-index-past  s 1) @result{} 18
(array-shape-index-last  s 1) @result{} 17

(array-shape-index-start s 2) @result{}  5
(array-shape-index-past  s 2) @result{}  7
(array-shape-index-last  s 3) @result{}  6
@end example
@end defun


@subsubheading Conversion


@defun array-shape->string @var{shape}
Return a string representation of @var{shape}.
@end defun


@subsubheading Port output


@defun array-shape-display @var{shape}
@defunx array-shape-display @var{shape} @var{port}
Write to @var{port} a human readable string representation of
@var{shape}.  @var{port} defaults to the current output port.
@end defun


@defun array-shape-write @var{shape}
@defunx array-shape-write @var{shape} @var{port}
Write to @var{port} a string representation of @var{shape} such that
it can be read back with @func{read}.  @var{port} defaults to the
current output port.
@end defun


@c page
@node arrays array
@section Dealing with arrays


Values of type @code{array} represent an array, a collection of values
that can be accessed by specifying a multidimensional position.  The
elements of an @code{array} are stored in a vector in row major order.

The @code{array} values are disjoint from all the other values, but the
@code{shape}; an @code{array} value represents itself its own
@code{shape}.  All the functions that can be applied to a @code{shape},
can also be applied to an @code{array}.


@subsubheading Constructors


@defun make-array @var{shape}
@defunx make-array @var{shape} @var{fill-value}
Build and return a new @code{array} described by @var{shape}.
@var{fill-value} is used as initialisation value for all the slots of
the array; it defaults to @false{}.
@end defun


@defun array @var{shape} @var{element} ...
Build and return a new @code{array} described by @var{shape}.  The
elements are stored in the slots of the underlying vector, in the given
order; there must be enough elements to fill the vector.
@end defun


@defun array-copy @var{array}
Build and return a deep clone of @var{array}.
@end defun


@defun array-view @var{array} @var{mapper}
Build and return a new @code{array} value sharing all the data with
@var{array} and using the closure @var{mapper} to map position
coordinates.

@var{mapper} must take a position value as argument and return a
position value as argument.  There is no constraint on what @var{mapper}
can do on the position.  @var{mapper} is composed with whatever mapper
function @var{array} already uses.
@end defun


@subsubheading Predicates and assertions


@defun array? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is an @code{array} value.
@end defun


@defun assert-array @var{obj} @var{func-name}
@defunx assert-array/or-false @var{obj} @var{func-name}
Raise an assertion violation exception if @var{obj} is not an
@code{array} value, or @false{}.  @var{func-name} is used @code{who}
argument for the exception.  Return @true{} if no exception is raised.
@end defun


@subsubheading Accessors


@defun array-set! @var{array} @var{position} @var{element}
Store @var{element} at @var{position} in @var{array}, overwriting the
old value.
@end defun


@defun array-ref @var{array} @var{position}
Return the element at @var{position} in @var{array}.
@end defun


@subsubheading Comparison


@defun array=? @var{pred=} @var{array0} @var{array} ...
Return @true{} if the arguments have equal number of dimensions and hold
the same elements according to @var{pred=}.  The predicate function
@var{pred=} should behave like @func{eqv?}.
@end defun


@subsubheading Conversion


@defun array->string @var{array}
Return a string representation of @var{array}.
@end defun


@subsubheading Port output


@defun array-display @var{array}
@defunx array-display @var{array} @var{port}
Write to @var{port} a human readable string representation of
@var{array}.  @var{port} defaults to the current output port.
@end defun


@defun array-write @var{array}
@defunx array-write @var{array} @var{port}
Write to @var{port} a string representation of @var{array} such that it
can be read back with @func{read}.  @var{port} defaults to the current
output port.
@end defun

@c page
@node comparisons
@chapter Comparison functions


The @library{comparisons} library implements an infrastructure for
comparison functions; it can be seen as an extension of the standard
procedures @func{=}, @func{<}, @func{char<?} etc.  The primary design
aspect is the separation of representing a total order and using it.

Since the compare procedures are often optional, comparing built in
types is as convenient as using built in function, sometimes more
convenient: For example, testing if the integer index @code{i} lies in
the integer range @math{[0, n)} can be written as @code{(<=/<? 0 i n)}.

@menu
* comparisons intro::           Introduction.
* comparisons examples::        Examples.
* comparisons conventions::     Terminology and conventions.
* comparisons atoms::           Comparing atoms.
* comparisons sequence::        Comparing lists and vectors.
* comparisons pair::            Comparing pairs and improper lists.
* comparisons default::         The default compare procedure.
* comparisons cons::            Constructing compare procedures.
* comparisons branch::          Branching.
* comparisons pred::            Predicates.
* comparisons minmax::          Minimum and maximum values.
* comparisons debug::           Debugging procedure.
@end menu

@c page
@node comparisons intro
@section Introduction


The @library{comparisons} library defines a mechanism for comparing
Scheme values with respect to a total order (aka linear order).  The
mechanism provides operations for:

@enumerate
@item
Comparing objects of the built-in types.

@item
Using a total order in situations that arise in programs.

@item
Facilitating the definition of a new total order.
@end enumerate

Traditionally, a total order is represented in Scheme by an order
predicate, like @func{<} or @func{char<?}.  In the context of
@library{comparisons}, however, a total order is represented by a Scheme
procedure comparing its two arguments and returning either @math{-1},
@math{0}, or @math{1} depending on whether the first argument is
considered smaller, equal, or greater than the second argument
respectively.  Examples of such compare procedures include:

@example
(lambda (x y)
  (sign (- x y)))
@end example

@noindent
for comparing real numbers, but also:

@example
(lambda (x y) 0)
@end example

@noindent
comparing anything.

The primary reason for using @math{3}--valued compare procedures
(instead of @math{2}--valued order predicates) is efficiency: When
comparison is computationally expensive, it is wasteful if two
predicates are evaluated where a single @math{3}--valued comparison
would suffice.

But dealing directly with @math{3}--valued comparisons in the
application program is inconvenient and obscures intention: For testing
@math{x < y} one would have to write:

@example
(= (compare x y) -1)
@end example

@noindent
for this reason, an operation @func{<?} is supplied which allows to
phrase the same test as:

@example
(<? compare x y)
@end example

This is an example of mapping the three possible outcomes of a
comparison into the two boolean values @true{} and @false{}.  Since
@func{<?}  takes the total order as an explicit parameter, a comfortably
large arsenal of tests can be made available for each and every total
order.  This deviates from the approach of @rnrs{6}, in which there are
only five operations (@func{=}, @func{<}, @func{>}, @func{<=},
@func{>=}) and for each total order (real/number, char, char--ci,
string, string--ci) a complete set of these five operations is provided.

But still, using @func{<?} would be inconvenient if the compare
procedure would have to be supplied explicitly every time.  For this
reason, the argument @var{compare} is often made optional and the
procedure @func{default-compare} is used whenever no @var{compare}
procedure is passed explicitly.  @func{default-compare} defines some
resonable total order on the built--in types of @rnrs{6}.

For the definition of comparison procedures, special control structures
(macros) are provided.  These control structures can be used in the
definition of a (potentially recursive) comparison procedure.

@c page
@node comparisons examples
@section Examples


Assume there is a type @samp{length} representing physical length;  the
type has an accessor procedure @func{meters} returning the length in
meters (a real number):

@example
(define-record-type length
  (fields (immutable meters     meters)))
@end example

A compare procedure for lengths can then be defined in terms of
@func{real-compare} as:

@example
(define (length-compare length1 length2)
  (real-compare (meters length1) (meters length2)))
@end example

@noindent
now:

@example
(<? length-compare x y)
@end example

@noindent
tests if length @var{x} is shorter than length @var{y}.  Also,

@example
(<=/<? length-compare a x b)
@end example

@noindent
tests if length @var{x} lies between length @var{a} (included) and
length @var{b} (excluded).  The expression:

@example
(min-compare length-compare x y z)
@end example

@noindent
is the shortest of the lengths @var{x}, @var{y}, and @var{z}.  Likewise,

@example
(chain<? length-compare x1 x2 x3 x4)
@end example

@noindent
tests if the lengths @var{x1}, @var{x2}, @var{x3}, @var{x3} are strictly
increasing, and so on.

Furthermore, assume there is another type @code{box} representing a
physical box; the type has procedures @func{width}, @func{height}, and
@func{depth} accessing the dimension (each giving a length):

@example
(define-record-type box
  (fields (immutable width      width)
          (immutable height     height)
          (immutable depth      depth)))
@end example

A comparison procedure for boxes, comparing first by width then by
height and then by depth, can be defined using the control structure
@func{refine-compare} as:

@example
(define (box-compare box1 box2)
  (refine-compare
    (length-compare (width  box1) (width  box2))
    (length-compare (height box1) (height box2))
    (length-compare (depth  box1) (depth  box2))))
@end example

@noindent
so:

@example
(<? box-compare b1 b2)
@end example

@noindent
tests if box @var{b1} is smaller than box @var{b2}, in the sense of the
order defined.  Of course, all the other tests, minimum, maximum etc.
are available, too.

As a final complication, assume that there is also a type @code{bowl}
with accessors @func{radius} (a @samp{length}) and @func{open?} (a
boolean):

@example
(define-record-type bowl
  (fields (immutable radius   radius)
          (immutable open?    open?)))
@end example

Bowls are to be compared first by whether they are open or closed, and
then by radius.  However, bowls and boxes also need to be compared to
each other, ordered such that a bowl is considered ``smaller'' than a
box.  (There are type--test predicates @func{box?} and @func{bowl?}).
Using the control structure @func{select-compare} this can be expressed
as:

@example
(define (container-compare c1 c2)
  (select-compare c1 c2
    (bowl? (boolean-compare (open?  c1) (open?  c2))
           (length-compare  (radius c1) (radius c2)))
    (box?  (box-compare c1 c2))
    (else "neither bowls nor boxes" c1 c2)))
@end example

This is an example of ``hierarchical extension'' of compare procedures.
Also note the implicit use of @func{refine-compare} in the @func{bowl?}
case.


@c page
@node comparisons conventions
@section Terminology and conventions


A @dfn{comparison procedure} is a Scheme procedure of two arguments
returning an exact integer in @math{@{-1, 0, 1@}} such that the valid
input values are ordered according to some total order.  A comparison
procedure, together with a set of Scheme values to which it is
applicable, represents a comparison function.

A @dfn{comparison} is either an expression applying a comparison
procedure to two values, or the result of such an expression.

Each operation (macro or procedure) processing the value of a comparison
checks if the value is indeed an exact integer in the set @math{@{-1, 0,
1@}}.  If this is not the case, an error is signalled.

Comparison procedures expecting certain types of arguments should raise
an error in case the arguments are not of this type.

@c page
@node comparisons atoms
@section Comparing atoms


This section describes comparison procedures for most of the atomic
types of @rnrs{6}: booleans, characters, strings, symbols, and numbers.
As a general naming convention, a procedure named:

@example
@var{type}-compare-@var{order}
@end example

@noindent
compares two objects of the type @var{type} with respect to a total
order for which @var{order} is a mnemonic hint (e.g. @samp{-ci} for
case--insensitive).  Of course, @samp{-@var{order}} may be absent if
there is just one order or the order is obvious.  It is an error if a
comparison procedure accepting objects of a certain type is called with
one or two arguments not of that type.


@defun boolean-compare @var{bool1} @var{bool2}
Compare two booleans, ordered by @false{} < @true{}.  A non--false value
is not interpreted as a ``true value,'' but rather an error will be
signalled.
@end defun


@defun char-compare @var{char1} @var{char2}
@defunx char-compare-ci @var{char1} @var{char2}
Compare characters as @func{char<=?} and @func{char-ci<=?}
respectively.  The suffix @code{-ci} means ``case insensitive.''
@end defun


@defun string-compare @var{string1} @var{string2}
@defunx string-compare-ci @var{string1} @var{string2}
Compare strings as @func{string<=} and @func{string-ci<=?}.  The suffix
@code{-ci} means ``case insensitive.''
@end defun


@defun symbol-compare @var{symbol1} @var{symbol2}
Compares symbols as @func{string<=} on the names returned by
@func{symbol->string}.
@end defun


@defun integer-compare @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx rational-compare @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx real-compare @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx complex-compare @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx number-compare @var{x} @var{y}
Compare two numbers using the @rnrs{6} functions @func{=} and @func{<}.
It is an error if an argument is not of the type specified by the name
of the procedure.

Complex numbers are ordered based on their magnitude:

@example
(real-compare (magnitude x) (magnitude y))
@end example

If at least one among @var{x} and @var{y} is a complex number:
@func{number-compare} defaults to @func{complex-compare}, else it
defaults to @func{real-compare}.

If one or both the arguments is @samp{+nan.0}:

@table @func
@item integer-compare
@itemx rational-compare
Raise an error because @samp{+nan.0} is neither integer nor rational.

@item real-compare
@itemx complex-compare
@itemx number-compare
Return @samp{+nan.0}.
@end table
@end defun

@c page
@node comparisons sequence
@section Comparing lists and vectors


This section describes comparison procedures for Scheme lists, vectors
and objects that can be accessed like lists or like vectors.

An object @var{x} can be accessed like a vector if there are procedures
@func{size} and @func{ref} such that @samp{(size x)} is a non--negative
integer @math{n} indicating the number of elements, and @code{(ref x i)}
is the @math{i}-th element of @var{x} for @math{i} in @math{@{0, ...,
n-1@}}.

The default vector access procedures are @func{vector-length} and
@func{vector-ref}.

An object @var{x} can be accessed like a (proper) list if there are
procedures @func{empty?}, @func{head} and @func{tail} such that
@code{(empty? x)} is a boolean indicating that there are no elements in
@var{x}, @func{(head x)} is the first element of @var{x}, and
@func{(tail x)} is an object representing the residual elements of
@var{x}.

The default list access procedures are @func{null?}, @func{car} and
@func{cdr}.

Independently of the way the elements are accessed, the natural ordering
of vectors and lists differs.  The following comparison policies are
defined:

@table @emph
@item As vectors
The shorter sequence is always smaller than the longer one, no matter
the elements in it.  Sequences of the same size are compared
lexicographically (element by element, stopping at the first different
one).

@item As lists
The empty sequence is smallest.  Two non--empty sequences are compared
by their first elements, and only if the first elements are equal the
residual sequences are compared, recursively.
@end table


@defun vector-compare @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx vector-compare @var{compare} @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx vector-compare @var{compare} @var{x} @var{y} @var{size} @var{ref}
@defunx vector-compare-as-list @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx vector-compare-as-list @var{compare} @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx vector-compare-as-list @var{compare} @var{x} @var{y} @var{size} @var{ref}
@defunx list-compare @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx list-compare @var{compare} @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx list-compare @var{compare} @var{x} @var{y} @var{empty?} @var{head} @var{tail}
@defunx list-compare-as-vector @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx list-compare-as-vector @var{compare} @var{x} @var{y}
@defunx list-compare-as-vector @var{compare} @var{x} @var{y} @var{empty?} @var{head} @var{tail}
Compare two sequences @var{x} and @var{y}, using @var{compare} for
comparing elements.  The result is an exact integer in @math{@{-1, 0,
1@}}.  If @var{compare} is not supplied, @func{default-compare} is used.

The procedure named @func{@var{access}-compare-as-@var{order}} accesses
the objects like @var{access} and compares them with respect to the
order given by @var{order}. The names @func{@var{type}-compare} are
abbreviations for @code{@var{type}-compare-as-@var{type}}.

In the following examples the difference between comparison as list and
comparison as vector does not show:

@example
(list-compare '()  '())                    @result{} 0
(list-compare '(1) '())                    @result{} +1
(list-compare '()  '(1))                   @result{} -1

(list-compare '(1) '(1))                   @result{} 0
(list-compare '(1) '(2))                   @result{} -1
(list-compare '(2) '(1))                   @result{} +1

(list-compare '(1 1) '(1 1))               @result{} 0
(list-compare '(1 1) '(1 2))               @result{} -1
(list-compare '(1 2) '(1 1))               @result{} +1

(list-compare '(1 1 1) '(1 1))             @result{} +1
(list-compare '(1 1)   '(1 1 1))           @result{} -1

(list-compare-as-vector '()  '())          @result{} 0
(list-compare-as-vector '(1) '())          @result{} +1
(list-compare-as-vector '()  '(1))         @result{} -1

(list-compare-as-vector '(1) '(1))         @result{} 0
(list-compare-as-vector '(1) '(2))         @result{} -1
(list-compare-as-vector '(2) '(1))         @result{} +1

(list-compare-as-vector '(1 1) '(1 1))     @result{} 0
(list-compare-as-vector '(1 1) '(1 2))     @result{} -1
(list-compare-as-vector '(1 2) '(1 1))     @result{} +1

(list-compare-as-vector '(1 1 1) '(1 1))   @result{} +1
(list-compare-as-vector '(1 1)   '(1 1 1)) @result{} -1
@end example

In the following examples the difference shows:

@example
(vector-compare         '#(1 1 1) '#(2 1)) @result{} +1
(vector-compare-as-list '#(1 1 1) '#(2 1)) @result{} -1
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node comparisons pair
@section Comparing pairs and improper lists


This section describes comparison procedures for Scheme pairs and
(possibly) improper lists.


@defun pair-compare-car @var{compare}
@defunx pair-compare-cdr @var{compare}
Construct a compare procedure on pairs which only uses the car (or,
respectively, the cdr), and ignores the other.  One could define:

@example
(define (pair-compare-car compare)
  (lambda (x y)
    (compare (car x) (car y))))
@end example

@func{pair-compare-car} can be used to turn a search data structure
(e.g. a heap) into a dictionary: Store @samp{(key . value)} pairs and
compare them using the compare procedure @code{(pair-compare-car
compare-key)}.
@end defun


@defun pair-compare @var{compare-car} @var{compare-cdr} @var{pair1} @var{pair2}
@defunx pair-compare @var{compare} @var{obj1} @var{obj2}
@defunx pair-compare @var{obj1} @var{obj2}
Compare two pairs, or (possibly improper) lists.

The quaternary form compares @var{pair1} and @var{pair2} by comparing
their cars using @func{compare-car}, and if the cars are equal the cdrs
are compared using @func{compare-cdr}.

The ternary form compares two objects by type using the ordering of
types:

@example
null < pair < neither-null-nor-pair
@end example

Two objects of type neither--null--nor--pair are compared using
@var{compare}.  Two pairs are compared by using @var{compare} on the
cars, and if the cars are equal by recursing on the cdrs.

The binary form uses @func{default-compare} as @var{compare}.

@example
(pair-compare '() 'foo)
=> -1

(pair-compare '() '(1 . 2)))
=> -1

(pair-compare '(1 . 2) 'foo)
=> -1

(pair-compare 3 4)
=> -1
@end example
@end defun


@c page
@node comparisons default
@section The default compare procedure


It is convenient to have a compare procedure readily available for
comparing most built--in types.


@defun default-compare @var{obj1} @var{obj2}
Compare the arguments by type using the ordering:

@example
null < pair   < boolean < char   < string
     < symbol < number  < vector < other
@end example

Two objects of the same type @var{type} are compared as
@func{@var{type}-compare} would, if there is such a procedure.  The type
@var{null} consists of the empty list.  The effect of comparing two
other objects or of comparing cyclic structures (made from lists or
vectors) is unspecified.
@end defun

@c page
@node comparisons cons
@section Constructing compare procedures


The syntactic extensions defined in this section are the primary
utilities for defining new compare procedures as conveniently as
possible.


@deffn Syntax refine-compare @var{expr} ...
The arguments, if any, must be expressions; they are evaluated from left
to right until a non--zero value is found (which then is the value) or
until there are no more arguments to evaluate (in which case the value
is @samp{0}).  If no arguments are supplied, the return value is
@samp{0}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax select-compare @var{expr1} @var{expr2} @var{clause} ...
Each @var{clause}, with the possible exception of the last, is of the
form:

@example
(@meta{type?} @meta{c1} ...)
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{type?} is an expression evaluating to a predicate procedure,
and @meta{ci} are expressions evaluating to an exact integer in
@math{@{-1, 0, 1@}}.  The last @var{clause} may be an ``else clause'',
which has the form:

@example
(else @meta{c1} ...)
@end example

@func{select-compare} is a conditional for defining hierarchical
extensions and refinements of compare procedures.  It compares the
values of @var{expr1} and @var{expr2} by trying the type tests in order,
and applies an implict @func{refine-compare} on the consequences upon a
match.

In more detail, evaluation proceeds as follows: First @var{expr1} and
@var{expr2} are evaluated in unspecified order, resulting in values
@var{x1} and @var{x2}, respectively.  Then the clauses are evaluated one
by one, from left to right.

For clause:

@example
(@meta{type?} @meta{c1} ...)
@end example

@noindent
first @meta{type?} is evaluated resulting in a predicate procedure
@var{type?}  and then the expressions @code{(@var{type?} @var{x1})} and
@code{(@var{type?}  @var{x2})} are evaluated and interpreted as
booleans:

@enumerate
@item
If both booleans are true then the overall value is:

@example
(refine-compare @meta{c1} ...)
@end example

@item
If only the first is true the result is @samp{-1}.

@item
If only the second is true the result is @samp{+1}.

@item
If neither is true the next clause is considered.
@end enumerate

An else clause is treated as if both tests where true.  If there are no
clauses left, the result is @samp{0}.

@func{select-compare} evaluates @var{expr1} and @var{expr2} exactly
once, even in the absence of any clauses.  Moreover, each @meta{type?}
is evaluated at most once and the resulting procedure @var{type?} is
called at most twice.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax cond-compare @meta{clause} ...
Each @meta{clause}, with the possible exception of the last, is of the
form:

@example
((@meta{t1} @meta{t2}) @meta{c1} ...)
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{t1} and @meta{t2} are expressions evaluating to booleans,
and @meta{ci} are expressions evaluating to an exact integer in
@math{@{-1, 0, 1@}}.

The last @var{clause} may be an ``else clause'', which has the form:

@example
(else @meta{c1} ...)
@end example

@func{cond-compare} is another conditional for defining hierarchical
extensions and refinements of compare procedures.

Evaluation proceeds as follows: The clauses are evaluated one by one,
from left to right.  For clause:

@example
((@meta{t1} @meta{t2}) @meta{c1} ...)
@end example

@noindent
first @meta{t1} and @meta{t2} are evaluated and the results are
interpreted as boolean values:

@enumerate
@item
If both booleans are true then the overall value is:

@example
(refine-compare @meta{c1} ...)
@end example

@item
If only the first is true the result is @samp{-1}.

@item
If only the second is true the result is @samp{+1}.

@item
If neither is true the next clause is considered.
@end enumerate

An else clause is treated as if both booleans where true.  If there are
no clauses left (or there are no clauses to begin with), the result is
@samp{0}.

@func{cond-compare} evaluates each expression at most once.
@end deffn

@c page
@node comparisons branch
@section Branching


The facilities described in this section provide a mechanism for using a
compare procedure (passed as a parameter) in the different situations
arising in applications.

@deffn Syntax if3 @meta{c} @meta{less} @meta{equal} @meta{greater}
@meta{c}, @meta{less}, @meta{equal}, and @meta{greater} are expressions.

@func{if3} is the 3--way conditional for comparisons.  First @meta{c} is
evaluated, resulting in value @var{c}.  The value @var{c} must be an
exact integer in @code{@{-1, 0, 1@}}, otherwise an error is signalled.

@table @math
@item @var{c} = -1
The value of the @func{if3} expression is obtained by evaluating
@meta{less}.

@item @var{c} = 0
@meta{equal} is evaluated.

@item @var{c} = 1
@meta{greater} is evaluated.
@end table
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax if=? @meta{c} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if=? @meta{c} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if<? @meta{c} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if<? @meta{c} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if>? @meta{c} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if>? @meta{c} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if<=? @meta{c} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if<=? @meta{c} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if>=? @meta{c} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if>=? @meta{c} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if-not=? @meta{c} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if-not=? @meta{c} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@meta{c}, @meta{consequent}, and @meta{alternate} are expressions.  If
@meta{alternate} is not provided, @code{(if #f #f)} is used.

These six macros are 2--way conditionals for comparisons.  First
@meta{c} is evaluated, resulting in value @var{c}.  The value @var{c}
must be an exact integer in @math{@{-1, 0, 1@}}, otherwise an error is
signalled.  Then, depending on the value of @var{c} and the name of the
macro, either @meta{consequence} or @meta{alternate} is evaluated, and
the resulting value is the value of the conditional expression.

The branch is chosen according to the following table:

@multitable {@func{if-not=?}} {@meta{consequent}012} {@meta{alternate}0}
@headitem @tab @meta{consequent} @tab @meta{alternate}
@item @func{if=?} @tab @code{c = 0} @tab @code{c in @{-1, 1@}}
@item @func{if<?} @tab @code{c = -1} @tab @code{c in @{0, 1@}}
@item @func{if>?} @tab @code{c = 1} @tab @code{c in @{-1, 0@}}
@item @func{if<=?} @tab @code{c in @{-1, 0@}} @tab @code{c = 1}
@item @func{if>=?} @tab @code{c in @{0, 1@}} @tab @code{c = -1}
@item @func{if-not=?} @tab @code{c in @{-1, 1@}} @tab @code{c = 0}
@end multitable
@end deffn

@c page
@node comparisons pred
@section Predicates


@defun =? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx <? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx >? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx <=? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx >=? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx not=? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y}]
If the values @var{x} and @var{y} are given, test if @var{x} and @var{y}
are in the relation specified by the name of the procedure @func{rel?},
with respect to compare procedure @var{compare}; otherwise construct a
predicate procedure.

In the forms:

@example
(rel? [@var{compare}] @var{x} @var{y})
@end example

@noindent
the result is a boolean depending on @code{(@var{compare} @var{x}
@var{y})} and the test @func{rel?} as specified for @func{if<?} etc.  If
@var{compare} is not supplied, @func{default-compare} is used.

In the form:

@example
(rel? [@var{compare}])
@end example

@noindent
the predicate procedure:

@example
(lambda (x y)
  (rel? @var{compare} @var{x} @var{y}))
@end example

@noindent
is constructed.  Again, if @var{compare} is not supplied,
@func{default-compare} is used.

A few examples for illustration:

@example
(>? "laugh" "LOUD")
=> #t

(<? string-compare-ci "laugh" "LOUD")
=> #t

(define char<=?
  (<=? char-compare))

(sort-by-less '(1 a "b") (<?))
=> '("b" a 1)

(sort-by-less '(1 a "b") (>?))
=> '(1 a "b")
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Warning:} A common mistake is writing @code{(<=? x y z)} where
@code{(<=/<=? x y z)} is meant; this will most likely manifest itself at
the time the expression @code{(x y z)} is evaluated.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun </<? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y} @var{z}]
@defunx </<=? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y} @var{z}]
@defunx <=/<? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y} @var{z}]
@defunx <=/<=? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y} @var{z}]
@defunx >/>? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y} @var{z}]
@defunx >/>=? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y} @var{z}]
@defunx >=/>? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y} @var{z}]
@defunx >=/>=? [@var{compare}] [@var{x} @var{y} @var{z}]
Test if @var{x}, @var{y}, and @var{z} form a chain with the two
relations specified by the name of the procedure @func{rel1/rel2?}, with
respect to the compare procedure @var{compare}.

If @var{compare} is not provided, @func{default-compare} is used.

If @var{x}, @var{y} and @var{z} are not provided, a predicate procedure
of three arguments is constructed.  The order in which the values are
compared is unspecified, but each value is compared at least once.

@quotation
@emph{Note:}

@example
(<=/<? real-compare 0 x 1)
@end example

@noindent
tests if @var{x} is a real number in the half open interval @code{[0,
1)}.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun chain=? @var{compare} @var{x1} ...
@defunx chain<? @var{compare} @var{x1} ...
@defunx chain>? @var{compare} @var{x1} ...
@defunx chain<=? @var{compare} @var{x1} ...
@defunx chain>=? @var{compare} @var{x1} ...
Test if the values @var{x1} @dots{} (zero or more values) form a chain
with respect to the relation specified by the name of the procedure, and
with respect to the compare procedure @var{compare}.  The result is a
boolean.

The order in which the values are compared is unspecified, but each
value is compared at least once (even if there is just one).

A sequence of values @var{x1}, @dots{}, @var{xn} forms a chain with
respect to the relation @func{rel?} if:

@example
(rel? @var{compare} @var{xi} @var{xj})
@end example

@noindent
for all @math{1 < i < j < n}.  In particular, this is the case for
@math{n \in @{0, 1@}}.

Since the relations @func{=}, @func{<}, @func{>}, @func{<}, and @func{>}
are transitive, it is sufficient to test:

@example
(rel? @var{compare} @var{xi} @var{xi+1})
@end example

@noindent
for @math{1 < i < n}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The reason every @var{xi} participates in at least one
comparison is type--checking: After testing if the values form a chain,
these value may be assumed to be of the type comparable by compare---
and this holds irrespectively of the number of values, or whether they
form a chain.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun pairwise-not=? @var{compare} @var{x1} ...
Tests if the values @var{x1} ... (zero or more values) are pairwise
unequal with respect to the compare procedure @var{compare}.  The result
is a boolean.

The order in which the values are compared is unspecified, but each
value is compared at least once (even if there is just one).

The values @var{x1}, ..., @var{xn} are pairwise unequal if:

@example
(not=? @var{compare} @var{xi} @var{xj})
@end example

@noindent
for all @math{i} different from @math{j}.  In particular, this is the
case for @math{n \in @{0, 1@}}.

Since compare defines a total ordering on the values, the property can
be checked in time @math{O(n log n)}.
@end defun


@defun compare-by< @var{lt-pred} [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx compare-by> @var{gt-pred} [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx compare-by<= @var{le-pred} [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx compare-by>= @var{ge-pred} [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx compare-by=/< @var{eq-pred} @var{lt-pred} [@var{x} @var{y}]
@defunx compare-by=/> @var{eq-pred} @var{gt-pred} [@var{x} @var{y}]
If optional arguments @var{x} and @var{y} are present then these are
compared with respect to the total order defined by the predicate(s)
given; the result is in @math{@{-1, 0, 1@}}.  If @var{x} and @var{y} are
not present then a procedure comparing its two arguments using the
predicate(s) given is constructed and returned.

The predicate procedures mean the following:

@table @var
@item lt-pred
Test if @math{x < y}.

@item le-pred
Test for @math{<=}.

@item gt-pred
Test for @math{>}.

@item ge-pred
Test for @math{>=}.

@item eq-pred
Test if @var{x} and @var{y} are equivalent.
@end table

The result returned by a predicate procedure is interpreted as a Scheme
truth value (i.e. @false{} is false and non--@false{} is true).

The purpose of the procedures compare-by-predicate(s) is to define a
compare procedure from an order predicate, and possibly an additional
equivalence predicate.  If an equivalence predicate eq-pred is given, it
is called before the order predicate because the equivalence may be
coarser than the total ordering, and it may also be cheaper.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} @func{char-compare} could be defined in terms of
@func{char<=?} as:

@example
(define char-compare
  (compare-by<= char<=?))
@end example
@end quotation
@end defun

@c page
@node comparisons minmax
@section Minimum and maximum values


@defun min-compare @var{compare} @var{x1} ...
@defunx max-compare @var{compare} @var{x1} ...
A minimum or maximum of the values @var{x1} ... (one or more values)
with respect to the compare procedure compare.

The result is the first value that is minimal (maximal, respectively).
The order in which the values are compared is unspecified, but each
value is compared at least once (even if there is just one value).
@end defun


@defun kth-largest @var{compare} @var{k} @var{x0} ...
The @var{k}-th largest element of values @var{x0} ... (one or more
values) with respect to the compare procedure @var{compare}.

More precisely:

@example
(kth-largest @var{compare} @var{k} @var{x0} ... @var{xn-1})
@end example

@noindent
returns the @code{(modulo k n)}-th element of the unique sequence
obtained by stably sorting @var{x0}, @dots{}, @var{xn-1}.  (Recall that
a sorting algorithm is stable if it does not permute items with equal
key, i.e. equivalent w.r.t. @var{compare}).

The argument @var{k} is an exact integer, and @math{n > 1}.  The order
in which the values @var{xi} are compared is unspecified, but each value
is compared at least once (even if there is just one value).

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The @math{0}--th largest element is the minimum, the
@math{(n-1)}-th largest element is the maximum.  The median is the
@math{((n - 1)/2)}-th largest element if @math{n} is odd, and the
average of the @math{(n/2 - 1)}-th and @math{n/2}-th largest elements if
@math{n} is even.
@end quotation
@end defun

@c page
@node comparisons debug
@section Debugging procedure


@defun debug-compare @var{compare}
Constructs a compare procedure equivalent to @var{compare} but with
debugging code wrapped around the calls to compare.  The debugging code
signals an error if it detects a violation of the axioms of a compare
function.  For this it is assumed that @var{compare} has no
side--effects.

More specifically, @code{(debug-compare @var{compare})} evaluates to a
compare procedure @var{compare1} which checks reflexivity, antisymmetry,
and transitivity of compare based on the arguments on which
@var{compare1} is called:

The procedure @var{compare1} checks reflexivity on any value passed to
compare, antisymmetry on any pair of values on which compare is called,
and transitivity on triples where two of the arguments are from the
current call to @var{compare1} and the third is a pseudo--random
selection from the two arguments of the previous call to @var{compare1}.
@end defun

@c page
@node loops
@chapter Loop constructs


The @library{loops} library provides extensions to the Scheme language
to loop over general sequences of values.

@menu
* loops intro::                 Introduction.
* loops comprehensions::        Comprehensions.
* loops qualifiers::            Qualifiers.
* loops generators::            Generators.
@end menu

@c page
@node loops intro
@section Introduction


An eager comprehension is a convenient notation for one or more nested
or parallel loops generating a sequence of values, and accumulating this
sequence into a result.  In its most simple form, a comprehension looks
like this:

@example
(list-ec (: i 5)
  (* i i))
@result{} (0 1 4 9 16)
@end example

@noindent
where @var{i} is a local variable that is sequentially bound to the
values 0, 1, @dots{}, 4, and the squares of these numbers are collected
in a list.  The following example illustrates most conventions with
respect to nesting and syntax:

@example
(list-ec (: n 1 4)
         (: i n)
  (list n i))
@result{} ((1 0) (2 0) (2 1)
    (3 0) (3 1) (3 2))
@end example

@noindent
the variable @var{n} is first bound to 1 then to 2 and finally to 3, and
for each binding of @var{n} the variable @var{i} is bound to the values
0, 1, ..., @var{n}-1 in turn.  The expression @code{(list n i)}
constructs a two--element list for each binding, and the comprehension
@func{list-ec} collects all these results in a list.

@c page
@node loops comprehensions
@section Comprehensions


@menu
* loops comprehensions do::     Simple loops.
* loops comprehensions list::   List accumulator loops.
* loops comprehensions string:: String accumulator loops.
* loops comprehensions vector:: Vector accumulator loops.
* loops comprehensions arith::  Arithmetic accumulator loops.
* loops comprehensions search:: Searching loops.
* loops comprehensions fold::   Folding loops.
* loops comprehensions define:: Defining new comprehensions.
@end menu

@c page
@node loops comprehensions do
@subsection Simple loops


@deffn Syntax do-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{command}
Evaluate the @var{command} exactly once for each binding in the sequence
defined by the qualifiers.  If there are no qualifiers @var{command} is
evaluated exactly once.  The expression is evaluated for its
side--effects only.  The result of the comprehension is unspecified.

@example
(let ((x 0))
  (do-ec                ;no qualifiers
    (set! x (+ x 1)))
  x)
@result{} 1

(let ((x 0))
  (do-ec (:range i 10)  ;i from 0 to 9
    (set! x (+ x 1)))
  x)
@result{} 10

(let ((x 0))
  (do-ec (:range i 0)   ;loops zero times
    (set! x (+ x 1)))
  x)
@result{} 0

(let ((x 0))
  (do-ec (:range n 10)  ;n from 0 to 9
         (:range k n)   ;k from 0 to n
    (set! x (+ x 1)))
  x)
@result{} 45
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops comprehensions list
@subsection List accumulator loops


@deffn Syntax list-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The list of values obtained by evaluating @var{expression} once for each
binding in the sequence defined by the qualifiers.  If there are no
qualifiers the result is the list with the value of @var{expression}.

@example
(list-ec                ;no qualifiers
  1)
@result{} (1)

(list-ec (:range i 4)   ;i from 0 to 3
  i)
@result{} (0 1 2 3)

(list-ec (:range n 3)
         (:range k (+ n 1))
  (list n k))
@result{} ((0 0)
    (1 0) (1 1)
    (2 0) (2 1) (2 2))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax append-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The list obtained by appending all values of @var{expression}, which
must all be lists.  Think of it as:

@example
(apply append (list-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}))
@end example

Examples:

@example
(append-ec              ;no qualifiers
  '(a b))
@result{} (a b)

(append-ec (:range i 0) ;loops zero times
  '(a b))
@result{} '()

(append-ec (:range i 1)
  '(a b))
@result{} (a b)

(append-ec (:range i 2)
  '(a b))
@result{} '(a b a b)
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops comprehensions string
@subsection String accumulator loops


@deffn Syntax string-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The string of all values of @var{expression}.  Think of it as:

@example
(list->string (list-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}))
@end example

Examples:

@example
(string-ec              ;no qualifiers
  #\a)
@result{} (string #\a)

(string-ec (:range i 0)
  #\a)
@result{} ""

(string-ec (:range i 1)
  #\a)
@result{} "a"

(string-ec (:range i 2)
  #\a)
@result{} "aa"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax string-append-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The string obtained by appending all values of @var{expression}, which
must all be strings.  Think of it as:

@example
(apply string-append (list-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}))
@end example

Examples:

@example
(string-append-ec
  "ab")
@result{} "ab"

(string-append-ec (:range i 0)
  "ab")
@result{} ""

(string-append-ec (:range i 1)
  "ab")
@result{} "ab"

(string-append-ec (:range i 2)
  "ab")
@result{} "abab"
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops comprehensions vector
@subsection Vector accumulator loops


@deffn Syntax vector-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The vector of all values of @var{expression}.  Think of it as:

@example
(list->vector (list-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}))
@end example

Examples:

@example
(vector-ec              ;no qualifiers
  1)
@result{} (vector 1)

(vector-ec (:range i 0)
  i)
@result{} (vector)

(vector-ec (:range i 1)
  i)
@result{} (vector 0)

(vector-ec (:range i 2)
  i)
@result{} (vector 0 1)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax vector-of-length-ec @var{k} @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The vector of all values of @var{expression}, of which there must be
exactly @var{k}.  This comprehension behaves like @func{vector-ec} but
can be implemented more efficiently.

@example
(vector-of-length-ec 1
  1)
@result{} (vector 1)

(vector-of-length-ec 0 (:range i 0)
  i)
@result{} (vector)

(vector-of-length-ec 1 (:range i 1)
  i)
@result{} (vector 0)

(vector-of-length-ec 2 (:range i 2)
  i)
@result{} (vector 0 1)
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops comprehensions arith
@subsection Arithmetic accumulator loops


@deffn Syntax sum-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The sum of all values of @var{expression}.  Think of it as:

@example
(apply + (list-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}))
@end example

Examples:

@example
(sum-ec                 ;no qualifiers
  1)
@result{} 1

(sum-ec (:range i 0)
  i)
@result{} 0

(sum-ec (:range i 1)
  i)
@result{} 0

(sum-ec (:range i 2)
  i)
@result{} 1

(sum-ec (:range i 3)
  i)
@result{} 3
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax product-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The product of all values of @var{expression}.  Think of it as:

@example
(apply * (list-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}))
@end example

Examples:

@example
(product-ec             ;no qualifiers
  1)
@result{} 1

(product-ec (:range i 1 0)      ;i from 1 to 1
  i)
@result{} 1

(product-ec (:range i 1 1)      ;loop zero times
  i)
@result{} 1

(product-ec (:range i 9 9)      ;loop zero times
  i)
@result{} 1

(product-ec (:range i 1 2)      ;i from 1 to 1
  i)
@result{} 1

(product-ec (:range i 1 3)      ;i from 1 to 2
  i)
@result{} 2

(product-ec (:range i 1 4)      ;i from 1 to 3
  i)
@result{} 6
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax min-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
@deffnx Syntax max-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The minimum and maximum of all values of @var{expression}.  The sequence
of values must be non-empty.  Think of these as

@example
(apply min (list-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}))
(apply max (list-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}))
@end example

If we want to return a default value in case the sequence is empty we
may want to consider:

@example
(fold3-ec 'infinity @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression} min min)
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops comprehensions search
@subsection Searching loops


@deffn Syntax any?-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{test}
Tests whether any value of @var{test} in the sequence of bindings
specified by the qualifiers is non--@false{}.  If this is the case:
@true{} is returned, otherwise @false{}.  If there are no bindings at
all, in the sequence specified by the qualifiers, then the result is
@false{}.  The enumeration of values stops after the first non--@false{}
encountered.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax every?-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{test}
Tests whether all values of @var{test} are non--@false{}.  If this is
the case: @true{} is returned, otherwise @false{}.  If the sequence is
empty the result is @true{}.  Enumeration stops after the first
@false{}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax first-ec @var{default} @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
@deffnx Syntax last-ec  @var{default} @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression}
The first or last value of @var{expression} in the sequence of bindings
specified by the qualifiers.  Before enumeration, the result is
initialized with the value of @var{default}; so this will be the result
if the sequence is empty.  Enumeration is terminated in @func{first-ec}
when the first value has been computed.
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops comprehensions fold
@subsection Folding loops


@deffn Syntax fold-ec @var{x0} @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression} @var{f2}
@deffnx Syntax fold3-ec @var{x0} @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expression} @var{f1} @var{f2}
Reduce the sequence @math{x[1], x[2], @dots{}, x[n-1]} of values
obtained by evaluating @var{expression} once for each binding as
specified by the @meta{qualifier} syntaxes.  The arguments @var{x0},
@var{f2} and @var{f1}, all syntactically equivalent to @var{expression},
specify the reduction process.

@example
(define (f2 expr knil)
  (+ knil (* expr expr)))

(fold-ec 0              ;knil
         (:range k 1 5) ;qualifier, k from 1 to 4
  k                     ;expression
  f2)
@result{} 30 ;(+ 0 (* 1 1) (* 2 2) (* 3 3) (* 4 4))
@end example

The reduction process for @func{fold-ec} is defined as follows.  A
reduction variable @var{x} is initialized to the value of @var{x0}, and
for each @math{k \in @{1, ..., n-1@}} the command:

@example
(set! x[k+1] (f2 x[k] x[k-1]))
@end example

@noindent
is evaluated.  Finally, @math{x[n]} is returned as the value of the
comprehension.

The reduction process for @func{fold3-ec} is different:

@enumerate
@item
If and only if the sequence is empty: @var{x0} is evaluated and returned
as the value of the comprehension.

@item
If the sequence in non--empty: A reduction variable @var{x} is
initialized to the value of @code{(f1 x[1])}, and for each @math{k \in
@{2, ..., n-1@}} the command:

@example
(set! x[k+1] (f2 x[k] x[k-1]))
@end example

@noindent
is evaluated; finally, @math{x[n]} is returned as the value of the
comprehension.
@end enumerate

Example:

@example
(define (f2 expr knil)
  (+ knil (* expr expr)))

(define (f1 x)
  x)

(fold3-ec 1234                  ;never used
          (:range k 2 5)        ;k from 2 to 4
  k                             ;expression
  f1
  f2)
@result{} 27 ;(+ (f1 2) (* 3 3) (* 4 4))

(fold3-ec 1234
          (:range k 2 2)        ;loop zero times
  k
  f1
  f2)
@result{} 1234
@end example

As the order of the arguments suggests, @var{x0} is evaluated outside
the scope of the qualifiers, whereas the reduction expressions involving
@var{f1} and @var{f2} are inside the scope of the qualifiers (so they
may depend on any variable introduced by the qualifiers).  Note that
@var{f2} is evaluated repeatedly, with any side--effect or overhead this
might have.

The main purpose of these comprehensions is implementing other
comprehensions as special cases.  They are generalizations of the
procedures @func{fold-left} and @func{reduce}.  Note that
@func{fold3-ec} is defined such that @var{x0} is only evaluated in case
the sequence is empty.  This allows raising an error for the empty
sequence.
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops comprehensions define
@subsection Defining new comprehensions


To create a new comprehension a hygienic macro with that name is
defined.  The macro transforms the new comprehension patterns into
instances of @func{do-ec}, which is the most fundamental eager
comprehension, or any other comprehension already defined.

For example, the following code defines @func{list-ec} and @func{min-ec}
in terms of @func{fold-ec} and @func{fold3-ec}:

@example
(define-syntax list-ec
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?etc1 ?etc ...)
     (reverse (fold-ec '() ?etc1 ?etc ... cons)))))

(define-syntax min-ec
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?etc1 ?etc ...)
     (fold3-ec (min) ?etc1 ?etc ... min min))))
@end example

Note that the pattern @samp{?etc1 ...} matches @var{qualifier*} and
@var{expression} without separate access to @var{qualifier*} and
@var{expression}.  In order to define a comprehension that does need
explicit access to the @var{expression} part, the following method is
used.

First, all qualifiers are collected into a nested--qualifier, and then
the ``exactly one qualifier'' case is implemented.  For illustration,
the following code defines @func{fold3-ec} in terms of @func{do-ec}:

@example
(define-syntax fold3-ec
  (syntax-rules (nested)

    ((fold3-ec x0 (nested q1 ...) q etc1 etc2 etc3 etc ...)
     (fold3-ec x0 (nested q1 ... q) etc1 etc2 etc3 etc ...))

    ((fold3-ec x0 q1 q2 etc1 etc2 etc3 etc ...)
     (fold3-ec x0 (nested q1 q2) etc1 etc2 etc3 etc ...))

    ((fold3-ec x0 expression f1 f2)
     (fold3-ec x0 (nested) expression f1 f2))

    ((fold3-ec x0 qualifier expression f1 f2)
     (let ((result #f)
           (empty  #t))
       (do-ec qualifier
         (let ((value expression)) ; don't duplicate code
           (if empty
               (begin
                 (set! result (f1 value))
                 (set! empty #f))
             (set! result (f2 value result)))))
       (if empty x0 result)))))
@end example

Finally, observe that the newly defined @func{fold3-ec} comprehension
inherits all types of qualifiers supported by @func{do-ec}, including
all application--specific generators; no further definitions are
necessary.

@c page
@node loops qualifiers
@section Qualifiers


This section defines the syntax @meta{qualifier}.  The nesting of
qualifiers is from left (outer) to right (inner).  In other words, the
rightmost generator ``spins faster''.  The nesting also defines the
region of the variables introduced by the generators.  This implies that
inner generators may depend on the variables of outer generators.  The
sequence of enumeration of values is strictly depth first.  These
conventions are illustrated by the first example.

The syntax @meta{qualifier} consists of the following alternatives.

@deffn {Qualifier Syntax} @meta{generator}
Enumerate a sequence of bindings of one or more variables.  The region
of the variables starts at the generator and extends over all subsequent
qualifiers and expressions in the comprehension.  @ref{loops generators,
Generators}
@end deffn


@deffn {Qualifier Syntax} if @var{test}
Filter the sequence of bindings by testing if @var{test} evaluates to
non--@false{}.  Only for those bindings for which this is the case, the
subsequent qualifiers of the comprehension are evaluated.

@example
(list-ec (:range i 10)
         (if (even? i))
  i)
@result{} (0 2 4 6 8)

(list-ec (:range i 5)
         (if (even? i))
         (:let j (+ 1 i))
  j)
@result{} (1 3 5)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Qualifier Syntax} not @var{test}
@deffnx {Qualifier Syntax} and @var{test} ...
@deffnx {Qualifier Syntax} or @var{test} ...
Abbreviated notations for filters of the form:

@example
(if (not @var{test}))
(if (and @var{test} ...))
(if (or  @var{test} ...))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Qualifier Syntax} begin @var{sequence}
Evaluate @var{sequence}, consisting of @samp{@var{command} ...
@var{expression}}, once for each binding of the variables defined by the
previous qualifiers in the comprehension.  Using this qualifier, side
effects can be inserted into the body of a comprehension.

@example
(let* ((ans '())
       (ell (list-ec (:range i 5)
                     (begin
                       (set! ans (cons i ans)))
                     i)))
  (list ans ell))
@result{} ((4 3 2 1 0)
    (0 1 2 3 4))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Qualifier Syntax} nested @meta{qualifier} ...
A syntactic construct to group qualifiers.  The meaning of a qualifier
according to the @samp{nested} syntax is the same as inserting the
@meta{qualifier} syntaxes into the enclosing comprehension.

This construct can be used to reduce comprehensions with several
qualifiers into a form with exactly one qualifier.

@example
(list-ec (nested (:range i 5)
                 (if (even? i))
                 (:let j (+ 1 i)))
  j)
@result{} (1 3 5)

(list-ec (:range i 5)
         (nested (if (even? i))
                 (:let j (+ 1 i)))
  j)
@result{} (1 3 5)

(list-ec (:range i 5)
         (if (even? i))
         (nested (:let j (+ 1 i)))
  j)
@result{} (1 3 5)

(list-ec (:range i 5)
         (if (even? i))
         (:let j (+ 1 i))
         (nested)
  j)
@result{} (1 3 5)
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops generators
@section Generators


@menu
* loops generators intro::      Introduction to generators.
* loops generators do::         Loop generators.
* loops generators typed::      Typed generators.
* loops generators ranges::     Range generators.
* loops generators port::       Port generators.
* loops generators dispatch::   Dispatched generators.
* loops generators let::        Let generators.
* loops generators parallel::   Parallel generators.
* loops generators cond::       Conditional generators.
@end menu

@c page
@node loops generators intro
@subsection Introduction to generators


This section defines the syntax @meta{generator}.  Each generator defines
a sequence of bindings through which one or more variables are run.  The
scope of the variables begins after the closing parenthesis of the
generator expression and extends to the end of the comprehension it is
part of.

The variables defined by the generators are specified using the syntax:

@example
<vars> -> <variable1>
       |  <variable1> (index <variable2>)
@end example

@noindent
where @var{variable1} runs through the values in the sequence defined by
the generator, and the optional @var{variable2} is an exact
integer--valued index variable counting the values (starting from
@math{0}).  The names of the variables must be distinct.  The following
example illustrates the index variable:

@example
(list-ec (: x (index i) "abc")
   (list x i))
@result{} ((#\a 0) (#\b 1) (#\c 2))
@end example

Unless defined otherwise, all generators make sure that the expressions
provided for their syntactic arguments are evaluated exactly once,
before enumeration begins.  Moreover, it may be assumed that the
generators do not copy the code provided for their arguments, because
that could lead to exponential growth in code size.

Finally, it is possible to assign a value to the variables defined by a
generator, but the effect of this assignment is unspecified; example:

@example
(list-ec (:range i 5)
  (set! i #\a)          ;undefined behaviour because of this
  ---)
@end example

@c page
@node loops generators do
@subsection Loop generators


@deffn {Generator Syntax} :do (@meta{lb} ...) @meta{ne1?} (@meta{ls} ...)
@deffnx {Generator Syntax} :do (let (@meta{ob} ...) @meta{oc} ...) (@meta{lb} ...) @meta{ne1?} (let (@meta{ib} ...) @meta{ic} ...) @meta{ne2?} (@meta{ls} ...)
Defines a generator in terms of a named @func{let}, optionally decorated
with inner and outer @func{let}.  This generator is for defining other
generators.  (In fact, the reference implementation transforms any other
generator into an instance of fully decorated @code{:do}.)

The generator is a compromise between expressive power (more flexible
loops) and fixed structure (necessary for merging and modifying
generators).

In the fully decorated form, the following syntactic variables are
present:

@table @meta
@item ob
Outer binding.

@item oc
Outer command.

@item lb
Loop binding.

@item ne1?
Not end predicate.

@item ib
Inner binding.

@item ic
Inner command.

@item ne2?
Not end predicate.

@item ls
Loop step.
@end table

They define the following loop skeleton:

@example
(let (@meta{ob} ...)
  @meta{oc} ...
  (let loop (@meta{lb} ...)
    (when @meta{ne1?}
      (let (@meta{ib} ...)
        @meta{ic} ...
        payload
        (when @meta{ne2?}
          (loop @meta{ls} ...))))))
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{oc} and @meta{ic} are syntactically equivalent to forms in
the body of a @func{begin}, i.e. they do not begin with a
@meta{definition}.  The latter requirement allows the code generator to
produce more efficient code for special cases by removing empty
@func{let} expressions altogether.
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops generators typed
@subsection Typed generators


@deffn {Generator Syntax} {:list} @var{vars} @var{arg0} @var{arg} ...
@deffnx {Generator Syntax} {:string} @var{vars} @var{arg0} @var{arg} ...
@deffnx {Generator Syntax} {:vector} @var{vars} @var{arg0} @var{arg} ...
Run through one or more lists, strings, or vectors.  First all the
@var{arg} expressions are evaluated and then all elements of the
resulting values are enumerated from left to right.  One can think of it
as first appending all arguments and then enumerating the combined
object.

@example
(list-ec (:string c (index i) "a" "b")
  (cons c i))
@result{} ((#\a . 0) (#\b . 1))

(list-ec (:string c (index i) "ciao" "mamma")
  (cons c i))
@result{} ((#\c . 0) (#\i . 1) (#\a . 2) (#\o . 3)
    (#\m . 4) (#\a . 5) (#\m . 6) (#\m . 7) (#\a . 8))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Generator Syntax} {:integers} @var{vars}
Runs through the sequence @math{0, 1, 2, @dots{}} of non--negative
integers.  This is most useful in combination with @samp{:parallel},
@samp{:while}, and @samp{:until} or with a non--local exit in the body
of the comprehension.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Application specific typed generator


To define a new typed generator a hygienic referentially transparent
macro of the same name is defined to transform the generator pattern
into an instance of the @samp{:do} generator.  The extension is fully
modular, meaning that no other macro has to be modified to add the new
generator.  This is achieved by defining the new macro in Continuation
Passing Style.

Technically, this works as follows.  Assume the generator syntax:

@example
(:mygen @var{var} @var{arg})
@end example

@noindent
is to be implemented, for example running the variable @var{var} through
the list @code{(reverse @var{arg})}.  The following definition
implements @code{:mygen} in terms of @samp{:list} using the additional
syntactic variable @var{cc} (read current continuation):

@example
(define-syntax :mygen
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((:mygen cc var arg)
     (:list cc var (reverse arg)))))
@end example

After this definition, any comprehension will accept the @code{:mygen}
generator and produce the proper code for it.  This works as follows.
When a comprehension sees something of the form @code{(@var{g} @var{arg}
...)} in the position of a @meta{qualifier} then it will transform the
entire comprehension into:

@example
(@var{g} (continue ...) @var{arg} ...)
@end example

This effectively ``transfers control'' to the macro @var{g}, for example
@samp{:mygen}.  The macro @var{g} has full control of the
transformation, but eventually it should transform the expression into:

@example
(:do (continue ...)  etc ...)
@end example

In the @samp{:mygen} example this is done by the @samp{:list} macro.
The macro @samp{:do} finally transforms into:

@example
(continue ... (:do etc ...))
@end example

As @samp{continue} has been chosen by the macro implementing the
comprehension, it can regain control and proceed with other qualifiers.

In order to ensure consistency of new generators with the ones defined
in @library{loops}, a few conventions are in order.

@itemize
@item
The generator patterns begin with one or more variables followed by
arguments defining the sequence.

@item
Each generator except @samp{:do} can handle an optional index variable.
This is most easily implemented using @samp{:parallel} together with
@samp{:integers}.  In case the payload generator needs an index anyhow
(e.g. @samp{:vector}) it is more efficient to add an index variable if
none is given and to implement the indexed case.

@item
Make sure that no syntactic variable of the generator pattern ever gets
duplicated in the code (to avoid exponential code size in nested
application), and introduce sufficient intermediate variables to make
sure expressions are evaluated at the correct time.
@end itemize

@c page
@node loops generators ranges
@subsection Range generators


@deffn {Generator Syntax} {:range} @var{vars} @var{stop}
@deffnx {Generator Syntax} {:range} @var{vars} @var{start} @var{stop}
@deffnx {Generator Syntax} {:range} @var{vars} @var{start} @var{stop} @var{step}
Runs through a range of exact rational numbers.

@table @code
@item (:range @var{vars} @var{stop})
Evaluate the expression @var{stop}, which must result in an exact
integer @math{N}, and runs through the finite sequence @math{0, 1, 2,
@dots{}, N-1}.  If @math{N} is zero or negative the sequence is empty.

@item (:range @var{vars} @var{start} @var{stop})
Evaluate the expressions @var{start} and @var{stop}, which must result
in exact integers @math{A} and @math{B}, and runs through the finite
sequence @math{A, A+1, A+2, @dots{}, B-1}.  If @math{B} is less or equal
@math{A} then the sequence is empty.

@item (:range @var{vars} @var{start} @var{stop} @var{step})
First evaluates the expressions @var{start}, @var{stop} and @var{step},
which must result in exact integers @math{A}, @math{B} and @math{S} such
that @math{S} is non--zero.  Then the sequence @math{A, A+S, A+2*S,
@dots{}, A+(N-1)*S} is enumerated where: @math{N = ceil((B-A)/S)}.

In other words, the sequence starts at @math{A}, increments by @math{S},
and stops when the next value would reach or cross @math{B}.  If
@math{N} is zero or negative the sequence is empty.
@end table
@end deffn


@deffn {Generator Syntax} {:real-range} @var{vars} @var{stop}
@deffnx {Generator Syntax} {:real-range} @var{vars} @var{start} @var{stop}
@deffnx {Generator Syntax} {:real-range} @var{vars} @var{start} @var{stop} @var{step}
Runs through a range of real numbers using an explicit index variable.
This form of range enumeration avoids accumulation of rounding errors
and is the one to use if any of the numbers defining the range is
inexact, not an integer, or a bignum of large magnitude.

Providing default values @math{0} for @var{start} and @math{1} for
@var{step}, the generator first evaluates @var{start}, @var{stop} and
@var{step}, which must result in reals @math{A}, @math{B} and @math{S}
such that @math{N = (B-A)/S} is also representable as a real.  Then the
sequence @math{0, 1, 2, @dots{}, N-1} is enumerated while the current
value @math{I} is less than @math{N}, and the variable in @var{vars} is
bound to the value @math{A+I*S}.  If any of the values @math{A},
@math{B} or @math{S} is non--exact then all values in the sequence are
non--exact.
@end deffn


@deffn {Generator Syntax} {:char-range} @var{vars} @var{min} @var{max}
Run through a range of characters.  First @var{min} and @var{max} are
evaluated, which must result in two characters @math{A} and @math{B}.
Then the sequence of characters @math{A, A+1, A+2, @dots{}, B} is
enumerated in the order defined by @func{char<=?}.  If @math{B} is
smaller than @math{A} then the sequence is empty.  Note that @math{B} is
included in the sequence.
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops generators port
@subsection Port generators


@deffn {Generator Syntax} {:port} @var{vars} @var{port}
@deffnx {Generator Syntax} {:port} @var{vars} @var{port} @var{read-proc}
Read from the port until the eof--object is read.  If a port reader
procedure @var{read-proc} is supplied: The generator first evaluates
@var{port} and @var{read-proc}, which must result in an input port
@var{p} and a procedure @var{r}.  Then the variable is run through the
sequence obtained by @code{(@var{r} @var{p})} while the result does not
satisfy @func{eof-object?}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops generators dispatch
@subsection Dispatched generators


@deffn {Generator Syntax} {:} @var{vars} @var{arg0} @var{arg} ...
First the @var{arg} expressions are evaluated into @math{a[1], a[2],
@dots{}, a[n]} and then a global dispatch procedure is used to dispatch
on the number and types of the arguments and run the resulting
generator.  Initially the following cases are recognized, with @math{i
\in @{1, @dots{}, n@}}:

@table @samp
@item :list
If for all @math{i}:

@example
(list? a[i]) @result{} #t
@end example

@item :string
If for all @math{i}:

@example
(string? a[i]) @result{} #t
@end example

@item :vector
If for all @math{i}:

@example
(vector? a[i]) @result{} #t
@end example

@item :range
If @math{n \in @{1, @dots{}, 3@}} and for all @math{i \in @{1, @dots{},
n@}}:

@example
(and (integer? a[i])
     (exact?   a[i]))
@result{} #t
@end example

@item :real-range
If @math{n \in @{1, @dots{}, 3@}} and for all @math{i \in @{1, @dots{},
n@}}:

@example
(real? a[i]) @result{} #t
@end example

@item :char-range
If @math{n = 2} and for all @math{i \in @{1, 2@}}:

@example
(char? a[i]) @result{} #t
@end example

@item :port
If @math{n \in @{1, 2@}} and:

@example
(and (input-port? a[1])
     (procedure?  a[2]))
@result{} #t
@end example
@end table

The current dispatcher can be retrieved as @code{(:-dispatch-ref)}, a
new dispatcher @samp{d} can be installed by @code{(:-dispatch-set! d)}
yielding an unspecified result, and a copy of the initial dispatcher can
be obtained as @code{(make-initial-:-dispatch)}.  Please refer to the
section below for recommendation how to add cases to the dispatcher.
@end deffn


@deffn {Generator Syntax} {:dispatched} @var{vars} @var{dispatch} @var{arg0} @var{arg} ...
Runs the variables through a sequence defined by @var{dispatch} and the
@var{arg} expressions.  The purpose of @samp{:dispatched} is
implementing dispatched generators, in particular the predefined
dispatching generator @samp{:}.

The working of @samp{:dispatched} is as follows: First @var{dispatch}
and the @var{arg} expressions are evaluated, resulting in a procedure
@var{d} (the ``dispatcher'') and the values @math{a[1], a[2], @dots{},
a[n]}.  Then:

@example
(d (list a[1] a[2] ... a[n]))
@end example

@noindent
is evaluated, resulting in a value @var{g}.  If @var{g} is not a
procedure then the dispatcher did not recognize the argument list and an
error is raised.  Otherwise the ``generator procedure'' @var{g} is used
to run @var{vars} through a sequence of values.

The sequence defined by @var{g} is obtained by repeated evaluation of
@code{(@var{g} @var{empty})} until the result is @var{empty}.  In other
words, @var{g} indicates the end of the sequence by returning its only
argument, for which the caller has provided an object distinct from
anything @var{g} can produce.

The definition of dispatchers is greatly simplified by the macro
@code{:generator-proc} that constructs a generator procedure from a
typed generator.  Let @code{(@var{g} @var{var} @var{arg0} @var{arg}
...)} be an instance of the @meta{generator} syntax, for example an
application--specific typed generator, with a single variable @var{var}
and no index variable.  Then:

@example
(:generator-proc (g arg0 arg ...))
=> g
@end example

@noindent
where the generator procedure @var{g} runs through the list:

@example
(list-ec (g var arg0 arg ...) var)
@end example

In order to define a new dispatching generator (say @code{:my}) first a
dispatching procedure (say @code{:my-dispatch}) is defined.  The
dispatcher will be called with a single (!) argument containing the list
of all values to dispatch on.  To enable informative error messages, the
dispatcher should return a descriptive object (e.g.  a symbol for the
module name) when it is called with the empty list.  Otherwise (if there
is at least one value to dispatch on), the dispatcher must either return
a generator procedure or @false{} (which means: no interest).  As an
example, the following skeleton code defines a dispatcher similar to the
initial dispatcher of @code{:}:

@example
(define (:my-dispatch args)
  (case (length args)
    ((1) (let ((a1 (car args)))
           (cond
            ((list? a1)
             (:generator-proc (:list a1)))
            ((string? a1)
             (:generator-proc (:string a1)))
            ...more unary cases...
            (else
             #f))))
    ((2) (let ((a1 (car args))
               (a2 (cadr args)))
           (cond
            ((and (list? a1) (list? a2))
             (:generator-proc (:list a1 a2)))
            ...more binary cases...
            (else
             #f))))
    ...more arity cases...
    (else
     (cond
      ((every?-ec (:list a args) (list? a))
       (:generator-proc (:list (apply append args))))
      ...more large variable arity cases...
      (else
       #f)))))
@end example

Once the dispatcher has been defined, the following macro implements the
new dispatching generator:

@example
(define-syntax :my
  (syntax-rules (index)
    ((:my cc var (index i) arg0 arg ...)
     (:dispatched cc var (index i) :my-dispatch arg0 arg ...))
    ((:my cc var arg0 arg ...)
     (:dispatched cc var :my-dispatch arg0 arg ...))))
@end example

This method of extension yields complete control of the dispatching
process.  Other modules can only add cases to @samp{:my} if they have
access to @samp{:my-dispatch}.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Extending the predefined dispatched generator

An alternative to adding a new dispatched generator is to extend the
predefined generator @samp{:}.  Technically, extending @samp{:} means
installing a new global dispatching procedure using
@samp{:-dispatch-set!} as described above.  In most cases, however, the
already installed dispatcher should be extended by new cases.  The
following procedure is a utility for doing so:

@example
(dispatch-union d1 d2)
@result{} d
@end example

@noindent
where the new dispatcher @var{d} recognizes the union of the cases
recognized by the dispatchers @var{d1} and @var{d2}.  The new dispatcher
always tries both component dispatchers and raises an error in case of
conflict.  The identification returned by @code{(d)} is the
concatenation of the component identifications @code{(d1)} and
@code{(d2)}, enclosed in lists if necessary.  For illustration, consider
the following code:

@example
(define (example-dispatch args)
  (cond
   ((null? args)
    'example)
   ((and (= (length args) 1) (symbol? (car args)) )
    (:generator-proc (:string (symbol->string (car args)))))
   (else
    #f)))

(:-dispatch-set! (dispatch-union (:-dispatch-ref) example-dispatch))
@end example

After evaluation of this code, the following example will work:

@example
(list-ec (: c 'abc)
  c)
@result{} (#\a #\b #\c)
@end example

Adding cases to @samp{:} is particularly useful for frequent cases of
interactive input.  Be warned, however, that the advantage of global
extension also carries the danger of conflicts, unexpected
side--effects, and slow dispatching.

@c page
@node loops generators let
@subsection Let generators


@deffn {Generator Syntax} :let @var{vars} @var{expression}
Run through the sequence consisting of the value of @var{expression},
only.  This is the same as:

@example
(:list @var{vars} (list @var{expression}))
@end example

If an index variable is specified, its value is @math{0}.  The
@samp{:let} generator can be used to introduce an intermediate variable
depending on outer generators.
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops generators parallel
@subsection Parallel generators


@deffn {Generator Syntax} :parallel @meta{generator} ...
Run several generators in parallel.  This means that the next binding in
the sequence is obtained by advancing each generator by one step.  The
parallel generator terminates when any of its component generators
terminate.  The generators share a common scope for the variables they
introduce.  This implies that the names of the variables introduced by
the various generators must be distinct.
@end deffn

@c page
@node loops generators cond
@subsection Conditional generators


@deffn {Generator Syntax} :while @meta{generator} @var{expression}
Run @meta{generator} while @var{expression} evaluates to non--@false{}.
The guarding expression is included in the region of the variables
introduced by the generator.

Note the distinction between the filter @code{if} and the modified
generator expressed by @code{:while}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Generator Syntax} :until @meta{generator} @var{expression}
Run @meta{generator} until after @var{expression} has evaluated to
non--@false{}.  The guarding expression is included in the region of the
variables introduced by the generator.
@end deffn

Note the distinction between @code{:while}, stopping at a certain
condition, and @code{:until}, stopping after a certain condition has
occurred.  The latter implies that the binding that has triggered
termination has been processed by the comprehension.

@c page
@node random
@chapter Sources of random bits


The @library{random} library provides an @api{} to access sources of
random and pseudo--random bits, or ``randomness sources'' for brevity.
Other, auxiliary libraries provide access to miscellaneous randomness
generators and utilities.

@menu
* random intro::                Introduction.
* random prng::                 Notes on the algorithms.
* random numbers::              Simple random numbers.
* random source::               Randomness sources.
* random mrg32k3a::             L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator
* random device::               Device--based generator.
* random utils::                Utilities.
* random generators::           Auxiliary generators.
* random dist::                 Random numbers from known distributions.
@end menu

@c page
@node random intro
@section Introduction


There are three different ways to use the interface, with varying
demands on the quality of the source and the amount of control over the
production process:

@itemize
@item
The ``no fuss'' interface specifies that @code{(random-integer U)}
produces the next random integer number @math{X} such that @math{0 <= X
< U} and @func{(random-real)} produces the next random real number
@math{X} such that @math{0 < X < 1}.  Details about how these random
values are produced may not be very relevant, as long as they appear to
be sufficiently random.

@item
For simulation purposes, on the contrary, it is usually necessary to
know that the numbers are produced deterministically by a pseudo--random
number generator of high quality and to have explicit access to its
state.  In addition, one might want to use several independent sources
of random numbers at the same time and it can be useful to have some
simple form of randomization.

@item
For security applications a serious form of true randomization is
essential, in the sense that it is difficult for an adversary to exploit
or introduce imperfections into the distribution of random bits.
Moreover, the linear complexity of the stream of random bits is more
important than its statistical properties.  In these applications, an
entropy source (producing truly random bits at a low rate) can be used
to randomize a pseudo random number generator to increase the rate of
available bits.
@end itemize

Once randomness sources provide the infrastructure to obtain random
bits, these can be used to construct other random deviates.  Most
important are floating point numbers of various distributions and random
discrete structures, such as permutations or graphs.

@c page
@node random prng
@section Notes on the algorithms


Pseudo--random number generators (@acronym{PRNG}s) are algorithms that
can automatically create long sequences of numbers (for example,
millions of numbers) with good random properties; eventually the
sequence repeats itself or memory usage grows without
bound@footnote{Wikipedia contributors, ``Random number generation,''
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/@/Random_number_generator} (accessed
June 28, 2009).}.

We examine some notes on @acronym{PRNG}s with the purpose of gaining
basic understanding of the code, and to reverese engineer the basic
steps of source code available on the Internet.  This section is meant
to help people new to the @acronym{PRNG} algorithms.

@menu
* random prng lcg::             Linear congruential generators.
* random prng mwc::             Multiply with carry.
* random prng csprng::          Cryptographically secure @acronym{PRNG}.
* random prng integers::        Generating integers in a specified range.
* random prng reals::           Generating real numbers.
@end menu

@c page
@node random prng lcg
@subsection Linear congruential generators


One of the most common @acronym{PRNG} is the @dfn{linear congruential
generator} (@acronym{LCG}), which uses the recurrence:

@example
N' = (a N + b) mod M      0 <= N', N < M
@end example

@noindent
to generate a new integer number @math{N'} from an initial state
@math{N}, @math{a} and @math{b} being known, fixed, recursion
coefficients.  The maximum number of integers the formula can produce is
the modulus @math{M}.

To avoid certain non--random properties of a single linear congruential
generator, several such generators with slightly different values of the
multiplier coeffient are typically used in parallel, with a ``master''
generator that selects among them.

The most efficient LCGs have an @math{M} equal to a power of @math{2},
most often @math{2^32} or @math{2^64}, because this allows the modulus
operation to be computed by merely truncating all but the rightmost
@math{32} or @math{64} bits@footnote{Wikipedia contributors, "Linear
congruential generator," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
@url{}http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_congruential_generator
(accessed May 24, 2009).}.

@acronym{LCG}s should not be used for applications where high-quality
randomness is critical.  For example, they are not suitable for a Monte
Carlo simulation or for cryptographic applications.  A further problem
of @acronym{LCG}s is that the lower--order bits of the generated
sequence have a far shorter period than the sequence as a whole if
@math{M} is set to a power of @math{2}.

@c page
@node random prng mwc
@subsection Multiply with carry


Multiply--with--carry (@acronym{MWC}) is a method invented by George
Marsaglia for generating sequences of pseudo--random integers based on
an initial set of from two to many thousands of randomly chosen seed
values@footnote{Wikipedia contributors, ``Multiply--with--carry,''
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiply-with-carry} (accessed May 8,
2009).}.

The main advantage of the @acronym{MWC} method is that it invokes simple
computer integer arithmetic and leads to very fast generation of
sequences of pseudo--random numbers with immense periods, ranging from
around @math{260} to @math{22e6}.  As with most @acronym{PRNG}s, the
resulting sequences are functions of the randomly chosen seed values,
but @acronym{MWC} generators seem to behave as well as, and often better
than, others in tests of randomness.

A @acronym{MWC} sequence is based on arithmetic modulo @math{M}, usually
@math{2^32}, because arithmetic modulo that @math{M} is automatic in
most computers, but sometimes a modulo such as @math{32^2 - 1} is used,
because arithmetic for modulus @math{2^32 - 1} requires only a simple
adjustment from that for @math{2^32}, and theory for @acronym{MWC}
sequences based on modulus @math{2^32} has some nagging difficulties
that use of @math{2^32 - 1} avoids.

Complementary--multiply--with--carry generators (@acronym{CMWC}) are a
slightly modified form of @acronym{MWC} giving better results.  A basic
formulation of the algorithm uses the recurrence:

@example
N' = (M - 1) - (a * N + C) mod M    0 <= N < M

           a * N + C
C' = floor ---------                     C < a
               M
@end example

@noindent
to generate a new number @math{N'} and a new carry @math{C'} from an
initial state @math{N} and an initial carry @math{C}, @math{a} being the
recursion coefficient and @math{M} being the modulo.

Better formulations adopt a ``lag'' of @math{r} values: Chosen a
positive integer @math{r}, an initial carry @math{C} and a vector
@math{[N(1), N(2), ..., N(r)]} of initial seed values, the new number
@math{N'} and the new carry @math{C'} are computed using the seed
@math{N(r)} as:

@example
N' = (M - 1) - (a * N(r) + C) mod M

           a * N(r) + C
C' = floor ------------
                M
@end example

@noindent
then the seed vector is right--shifted purging @math{N(r)}:

@example
N(r)   = N(r-1)
N(r-1) = N(r-2)
...
N(2)   = N(1)
N(1)   = N'
@end example

@c page
@node random prng csprng
@subsection Cryptographically secure @acronym{PRNG}


A cryptographically secure pseudo--random number generator
(@acronym{CSPRNG}) is a @acronym{PRNG} with properties that make it
suitable for use in cryptography.  The requirements of an ordinary
@acronym{PRNG} are also satisfied by a @acronym{CSPRNG}, but the reverse
is not true.

@acronym{CSPRNG} requirements fall into two groups: that they pass
statistical randomness tests; that they hold up well under serious
attacks, even when part of their initial or running state becomes
available to an attacker@footnote{Wikipedia contributors,
``Cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator,'' Wikipedia,
The Free Encyclopedia, @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/@/
Cryptographically@/_secure@/_pseudo-random@/_number_generator} (accessed
June 6, 2009).}.

@c page
@node random prng integers
@subsection Generating integers in a specified range


In applications using a randomness source, it happens to need a
pseudo--random integer @math{X} in a given range @math{0 <= X < U},
while the @acronym{PRNG} generates a pseudo--random integer @math{N} in
the range @math{0 <= N < M}.  In other words: We need a sample from the
range @math{0 <= X < U} having uniform probability distribution, by
means of a sample from the range @math{0 <= N < M} having a uniform
probability distribution.

We distinguish the two cases @math{U <= M} and @math{M < U}, because
when @math{U <= M} there are more integers in the range @math{0 <= N <
M} than in the range @math{0 <= X < U}, while when @math{M < U} it is
the other way around.

@itemize
@item
When @math{U <= M}, we have to understand that doing a simple @math{N
mod U} is incorrect, because it breaks uniform distribution of the
result in the range @math{0 <= X < U}.  We can use the following
formulation which gives uniformly distributed results:

@example
Q  = floor(M / U)
QU = Q * U

loop:
  N = <generate the next integer>
  if (N < QU)
  then X = floor(N / Q)
  else goto loop
@end example

@noindent
notice that @math{QU = Q * U <= M}; also notice that it is statistically
possible that the algorithm loops forever, but we can hope that it finds
a solution in a reasonable short time.  It works like this:

@enumerate
@item
Conceptually partition the range @math{0 <= N < QU} in @math{U}
intervals each of length @math{Q}, indexed by @math{X} in the range
@math{0 <= X < U}.

@item
Generate an integer @math{N} and discard it if @math{QU <= N}.

@item
If @math{N} is in the range @math{0 <= N < QU}, then it is also in a
range @math{X * Q < N < (X+1) * Q}.  @math{X} is the result.
@end enumerate

@item
When @math{M < U}, we have to generate pseudo--random integers @math{N'}
uniformly distributed in a range @math{0 <= N' < M'}, with @math{M < U
<= M'}.  We can do it by computing the following formula, which is a
polynomial in @math{M} and a linear combination with positive
coefficients in @math{N(i)} with @math{0 <= i < k}:

@example
N' = N0 + M * N1 + M^2 * N2 + ... +
   + ... + M^(k-2) * N(k-2) + M^(k-1) * N(k-1)
@end example

@noindent
where @math{N0}, @math{N1}, ..., @math{N(k-1)} are all generated
integers in the range @math{0 <= N(i) < M}.  The maximum value, that is
@math{M' - 1}, is realised when every @math{N(i)} equals @math{M - 1}:

@example
M' - 1 = (M - 1) + M * (M - 1) + M^2 * (M - 1) + ... +
       + ... + M^(k-2) * (M - 1) + M^(k-1) * (M - 1)
       = (M - 1) * [1 + M + M^2 + ... + M^(k-2) + M^(k-1)]
       = (M - 1) * (1 - M^k)/(1 - M)
       = (M - 1) * (M^k - 1)/(M - 1)
       = M^k - 1
@end example

@noindent
which implies @math{M^k = M'}.  So by selecting @math{k} such that
@math{U <= M^k} we are sure that @math{N'} will be in a suitable range.

Computing this polinomial/combination is like expressing the big
pseudo--random integer @math{N'} in base @math{M} where @math{N(i)} are
the digits.  Each possible @math{N'} is uniquely associated to a
@math{k}--tuple of integers @math{N(i)}.  Being the probability of
@math{N(i)} uniformly distributed, each possible @math{k}--tuple has
uniform probability in the set of all the possible @math{k}--tuples.  So
also the probability of @math{N'} is uniformly distributed in the range
@math{0 <= N' < M^k}.

Then we proceed like we did before for @math{U <= M}:

@example
Q  = floor(M' / U)
QU = Q * U

loop:
  N' = <compute the next polynomial>
  if (N' < QU)
  then X = floor(N' / Q)
  else goto loop
@end example
@end itemize

@c page
@node random prng reals
@subsection Generating real numbers


We want a sample @math{X} from the discrete range of representable
flonums in @math{0 <= X < 1} with a distribution that mimics the uniform
distribution of real numbers @math{R} in the continuous range @math{0 <
R < 1}.

Knowing that the integers @math{N} generated by a @acronym{PRNG} are
uniformly distributed in the range @math{0 <= N < M}, a pseudo--random
flonum @math{X} in the range @math{0 < X < 1} can be computed from a
generated @math{N} with the following normalisation formula:

@example
X = (1 + N) / (1 + M)
@end example

@noindent
notice that:

@example
N = 0        =>  X = 1 / (1 + M) > 0
N = (M - 1)  =>  X = M / (1 + M) < 1
@end example

@noindent
sometimes this is enough, but we have to notice that: There may be more
representable flonums in @math{0 < X < 1} than exact fractions like
@math{(1 + N) / (1 + M)}.

The following program prints the generated inexact fractions for the
very simple case @math{M = 5}, it prints also the intervals between two
adjacent fractions:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (lists))

(define M 5)
(fold-left (lambda (prev-X X)
             (write (list X (- X prev-X)))
             (newline)
             X)
           0.0
           (map (lambda (N)
                  (inexact (/ (+ 1 N) (+ 1 M))))
             (list-tabulate M values)))
@print{} (0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666)
@print{} (0.3333333333333333  0.16666666666666666)
@print{} (0.5                 0.16666666666666669)
@print{} (0.6666666666666666  0.16666666666666663)
@print{} (0.8333333333333334  0.16666666666666674)
@end example

@noindent
so the generated flonums are in ``units'' of approximately @math{1/6 =
0.166666666666666}; we can compute this unit with @math{1 / (1 + M)}.

It is useful to be able to generate flonums in smaller units: We can do
it by generating a pseudo--random integer @math{N'} uniformly
distributed in a range larger than @math{0 <= N < M}.  We use the same
method previously outlined for large integers generation.  @ref{random
prng integers, Generating integers in a specified range}

So, we select a value for the desired unit, then we find @math{M'} such
that:

@example
1 / (1 + M') <= unit
=>  1 + M' >= 1 / unit
=>  M' >= (1 / unit) - 1
=>  1  >= (1 / unit) - 1 / M'
@end example

@noindent
then we generate a big pseudo--random integer @math{N'} in the range
@math{0 <= N' < M'} and normalise it with:

@example
X = (1 + N') / (1 + M')
@end example

@c page
@node random numbers
@section Simple random numbers


@defvr {Constant} default-random-source
A randomness source built by @func{make-random-source/mrg32k3a}, making
use of Pierre L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator.  @ref{random mrg32k3a,
L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator}.
@end defvr


@defun random-integer @var{n}
Use @code{default-random-source} to generate the next integer @math{X}
in the range @math{0 <= X < U}, where @var{U} is a positive integer.
Subsequent results of this procedure are independent, uniformly
distributed over the range @math{0 <= X < U}.
@end defun


@defun random-real
Use @code{default-random-source} to generate the next real number
@math{X} in the range @math{0 < X < 1}.  @math{X=0} and @math{X=1} are
excluded in order to allow @math{\log(X)} and @math{\log(1-X)} without
the danger of a numerical exception.  Subsequent results of this
procedure are independent, uniformly distributed in the range @math{0 <
X < 1}.
@end defun

@c page
@node random source
@section Randomness sources


@deffn Parameter random-source-maker
Hold a procedure that can be used to generate a new randomness source.
It is initialised to @func{make-random-source/mrg32k3a}.  For example,
it can be used as:

@example
(define source  ((random-source-maker)))
(define integer (random-source-integer-maker source))
(display (integer))
@print{} <a random integer>
@end example

@noindent
and as:

@example
(parameterise ((random-source-maker
                  make-random-source/device))
  (let* ((source  ((random-source-maker)))
         (integer (random-source-integer-maker source)))
    (display (integer))))
@print{} <a random integer>
@end example
@end deffn


@defun random-source? @var{obj}
Test if @var{obj} is a randomness source.  Objects of type randomness
source are distinct from all other types of objects.
@end defun


@defun random-source-state-ref @var{source}
@defunx random-source-state-set! @var{source} @var{state}
Get and set the current state of @var{source}.  The purpose of these
functions is to allow saving and restoring the state between sessions
(for example, save the state to a file and reload it later).

The state value is always a vector whose first element is a symbol
describing the generator.  The other elements of the vector depend on
the kind of generator: Refer to generator's documentation for their
format.
@end defun


@defun random-source-seed! @var{source} @var{integers-maker}
Reseed @var{source} to a new state.  @var{integers-maker} must be a a
generator of random integer numbers, like the ones returned by
@func{random-source-integers-maker}.  Notice that many random sources
require @var{integer-makers} to return integers representable with
@math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun random-source-required-seed-values @var{source}
When @func{random-source-seed!} is used to reseed a @var{source}, some
generator will invoke @var{integers-maker} a fixed and known number of
times, other generators will invoke it a configurable number of times,
other generators will invoke it until it first returns @false{}, other
generators will invoke it until the returned numbers have some desired
property.

This function returns the number of times @var{integers-maker} will be
called; if the return value is @false{}: @var{integers-maker} will be
invoked until it first returns @false{}; if the return value is
infinity: @var{integers-maker} will be invoked until it returns numbers
with some desired property.
@end defun


@defun random-source-jumpahead! @var{source} @var{number-of-steps}
Move ahead @var{number-of-steps} randomness @var{source}'s state.  What
this means exactly depends on the type of @var{source}.
@end defun


The following procedures return a closure @var{rand} to generate
pseudo--random integers and real numbers using a randomness
@var{source}.  If an application obtains and uses several @var{rand}
procedures for the same randomness @var{source}, a call to any of these
procedures advances the state of @var{source}.  Hence, the procedures do
not produce the same sequence of random integers each, but rather share
a state.


@defun random-source-integers-maker @var{source}
Return a procedure @var{rand} to generate random integers using
@var{source}.  @var{rand} takes a single argument @var{U}, which must be
a positive integer, and returns the next uniformly distributed random
integer @math{X} in the interval @math{0 <= X < U} by advancing the
state of @var{source}.
@end defun


@defun random-source-reals-maker @var{source}
@defunx random-source-reals-maker @var{source} @var{unit}
Return a procedure @var{rand} which, when invoked with no arguments,
generates random real numbers @math{X} in the range @code{0 < X < 1}
using @var{source}.  @math{X=0} and @math{X=1} are excluded in order to
allow @math{\log(X)} and @math{\log(1-X)} without the danger of a
numerical exception.

The optional parameter @var{unit} determines the quantization of the
output; to have effect, @var{unit} must be a number such that @code{0 <
unit < 1}, if @var{unit} is greater than, or equal to, @math{1} the
generated numbers will have the default unit.  The numbers created by
@var{rand} are spaced by at most @var{unit}.  @ref{random prng reals,
Generating real numbers}, for details.
@end defun

@c page
@node random mrg32k3a
@section L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator


The default randomness source of @library{random} is Pierre L'Ecuyer's
MRG32k3a generator:

@quotation
P. L'Ecuyer.  ``Good Parameter Sets for Combined Multiple Recursive
Random Number Generators'', Shorter version in Operations Research, 47,
1 (1999), 159--164.

P. L'Ecuyer, R. Simard, E. J. Chen, W. D. Kelton. ``An Object--Oriented
Random--Number Package With Many Long Streams and Substreams''.  2001.
To appear in Operations Research.
@end quotation


@defun make-random-source/mrg32k3a
Create and return a new randomness source using MRG32k3a, representing a
deterministic stream of random bits.  Each returned randomness source
generates the same stream of values, unless the state is modified with
@func{random-source-seed!}.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 7, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/mrg32k3a}.  All the other values in the vector
are positive integers.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The algorithm

The MRG32k3a generator produces values @math{N} in the range @math{0 <=
N < 2^32 - 209}.  A new pseudo--random number @math{N} is generated with
the following computation starting from the state vectors @math{[A1, A2,
A3]} and @math{[B1, B2, B3]}:

@example
M1 = 4294967087 = 2^32 - 209
M2 = 4294944443 = 2^32 - 22853

c2 =  1403580
c3 =  -810728
d1 =   527612
d3 = -1370589

A0 = (          c2 * A2 + c3 * A3) mod M1
B0 = (d1 * B1 +           d3 * B3) mod M2

; right-shift A, purging the old A3
A3 = A2
A2 = A1
A1 = A0

; right-shift B, purging the old B3
B3 = B2
B2 = B1
B1 = B0

N = (A0 - B0) mod M1
@end example

@noindent
notice that @math{M1} and @math{M2} are two prime numbers just below
@math{2^32}; @math{c2}, @math{c3}, @math{d1} and @math{d3} are called
@dfn{recursion coefficients}.  The @library{random} library defines the
initial state vectors as:

@example
A1 = 1062452522
A2 = 2961816100
A3 =  342112271

B1 = 2854655037
B2 = 3321940838
B3 = 3542344109
@end example

@c page
@node random device
@section Device--based random numbers


In Unix--like operating systems, @file{/dev/random} is a special file
that serves as a true random number generator or as a pseudorandom
number generator.  It allows access to environmental noise collected
from device drivers and other sources.  Not all operating systems
implement the same semantics for @file{/dev/random}@footnote{See
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urandom}, last verified Fri Jun 26,
2009.}.

@defun make-random-source/device
@defunx make-random-source/device @var{device}
Create and return a new randomness source using the specified
@var{device} to generate random integers in the range @math{[0, 2^32)}.
When @var{device} is not specified, it defaults to @file{/dev/urandom}.

We have to remember that reading @file{/dev/random} will @strong{block}
if not enough entropy is available, waiting for more randomness to be
provided by the system.  This is why, by default, this function will use
@file{/dev/urandom}, which never blocks but provides randomness of
lesser quality.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 7, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/device}.  The other values are the device
pathname, a cache vector of values, the index of the next value to be
extracted from the cace vector.
@end defun


@deffn Parameter random-device-cache-length
Device--based randomness sources cache read bytes into a bytevector of
fixed size.  This parameter allows us to select the size at source
construction time.  It is preset to @math{4096}.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Low level @api{} for device randomness sources


@defun %random-bytevector @var{device} @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx random-bytevector @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx urandom-bytevector @var{number-of-bytes}
Read @var{number-of-bytes} from the specified @var{device} on the file
system and return them in a newly allocated bytevector.
@func{random-bytevector} is a specialised version reading bytes from
@file{/dev/random}.  @func{urandom-bytevector} is a specialised version
reading bytes from @file{/dev/urandom}.
@end defun


@defun %random-bytevector! @var{device} @var{bv}
@defunx random-bytevector! @var{bv}
@defunx urandom-bytevector! @var{bv}
Fill the bytevector @var{bv} with bytes read from the specified
@var{device} on the file system; return @var{bv} itself.
@func{random-bytevector!} is a specialised version reading bytes from
@file{/dev/random}.  @func{urandom-bytevector!} is a specialised version
reading bytes from @file{/dev/urandom}.
@end defun

@c page
@node random utils
@section Utilities


@menu
* random utils misc::           Miscellaneous utility functions.
* random utils lists::          Specialised list functions.
* random utils vectors::        Specialised vector functions.
* random utils strings::        Specialised string functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node random utils misc
@subsection Miscellaneous utility functions


The following bindings are exported by the @library{random} library.


@defun random-source-integers-maker-from-range @var{source} @var{start} @var{last}
@defunx random-source-integers-maker-from-range @var{source} @var{start} @var{last} @var{step}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
random integer in the range selected by @var{start} and @var{last} both
included, using randomness from @var{source}.  @var{start} and
@var{last} must be exact integers.  The optional @var{step} argument,
which defaults to one, establishes the step of allowed values from the
range.
@end defun


@defun random-source-reals-maker-from-range @var{source} @var{start} @var{last}
@defunx random-source-reals-maker-from-range @var{source} @var{start} @var{last} @var{step}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
random real in the range selected by @var{start} and @var{last}, using
randomness from @var{source}.  @var{start} and @var{last} must be real
numbers.

@itemize
@item
When @var{step} is not used: The result @math{R} is computed by
generating a random real @math{X} in the range @math{0 < X < 1}, then
computing:

@example
R = start + (last - start) * X
@end example

@noindent
so @math{R} is in the range delimited by @var{start} and @var{last} both
excluded.  The random real @math{X} is computed with no specified unit.
@ref{random source, @func{random-source-reals-maker}}, for details.

@item
When @var{step} is used: The result @math{R} is computed by generating a
random integer @var{N} in the range @math{0 <= N < U} with upper limit:

@example
U = floor[(last - start) / step]
@end example

@noindent
then computing:

@example
R = start + step * N
@end example

@noindent
so @math{R} is in the range delimited by @var{start} included and
@var{last} excluded.

@end itemize
@end defun


@defun random-permutations-maker @var{source}
Return a closure which, when applied to an integer number @var{n},
generates random permutations of the set @code{@{0, ..., n-1@}} using
randomness from @var{source}.  Such a permutation is represented by a
vector of length @var{n} for the images of the points.
@end defun

@c page
@node random utils lists
@subsection Specialised list functions


The auxiliary library @library{random lists} exports bindings
specialised to handle lists and randomness sources; it is based on
@library{random} only.


@defun random-list-unfold-numbers @var{number-maker} @var{number-of-numbers}
Given the closure @var{number-maker} returning a random number, build
and return a new list of @var{number-of-numbers} random numbers.
@end defun


@defun random-list-shuffle @var{ell} @var{source}
Build and return a new list shuffling the elements of @var{ell} using
randomness from the given @var{source}.
@end defun


@defun random-list-sample @var{ell} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
randomly selected item from @var{ell}, using randomness from
@var{source}.
@end defun


@defun random-list-sample-population @var{ell} @var{len} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a list
of @var{len} items randomly selected from @var{ell}, using randomness
from @var{source}.
@end defun

@c page
@node random utils vectors
@subsection Specialised vector functions


The auxiliary library @library{random vectors} exports bindings
specialised to handle vectors and randomness sources; it is based on
both @library{random} and @library{vectors}.  Arguments to the following
functions follow the same conventions established for @library{vectors}
and @library{vectors low}.  @ref{vectors convention, Interface
conventions}


@defun random-vector-unfold-numbers @var{number-maker} @var{number-of-numbers}
Given the closure @var{number-maker} returning a random number, build
and return a new list of @var{number-of-numbers} random numbers.
@end defun


@deffn Function %random-vector-shuffle @var{source} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-vector-shuffle @var{V} @var{source}
Build a new vector copying the selected subvector, then shuffle it using
randomness from the given @var{source}.  Return the new vector.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-vector-shuffle! @var{source} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-vector-shuffle! @var{V} @var{source}
Shuffle the selected subvector using randomness from the given
@var{source}.  Return the shuffled vector itself.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-vector-sample @var{source} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-vector-sample @var{V} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
randomly selected item from the selected subvector, using randomness
from @var{source}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-vector-sample-population @var{source} @var{len} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-vector-sample-population @var{V} @var{len} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
vector of @var{len} items randomly selected from the selected subvector
of @var{vec}, using randomness from @var{source}.
@end deffn


@defun random-integers-with-sum @var{requested-sum} @var{number-of-numbers} @var{inclusive-min} @var{exclusive-max} @var{source}
Return a vector of length @var{number-of-numbers}, holding random
integers in the range @var{inclusive-min}, @var{exclusive-max} generated
using randomness from @var{source}.  The integers are such that their
sum equals @var{requested-sum}.
@end defun


@defun random-reals-with-sum @var{requested-sum} @var{number-of-numbers} @var{exclusive-min} @var{exclusive-max} @var{source}
Return two values:

@enumerate
@item
A vector of length @var{number-of-numbers}, holding random reals in the
range @var{exclusive-min}, @var{exclusive-max} generated using
randomness from @var{source}; the numbers are such that their sum equals
approximately @var{requested-sum}.

@item
The actual sum between the numbers in the vector.
@end enumerate

Notice that rounding errors can be can be sensible here, so the solution
may need a refinement.
@end defun


@defun random-reals-with-sum-refine @var{vec} @var{actual-sum} @var{requested-sum} @var{tolerance} @var{max-ntries}
@var{vec} and @var{actual-sum} must be the return values of a previous
call to @func{random-reals-with-sum}.  This function refines the result
trying to reduce the absolute difference between @var{actual-sum} and
@var{requested-sum} below @var{tolerance}, which must be a strictly
positive real number.  It is an iterative process: It will stop when the
tolerance is achieved or when @var{max-ntries} iterations have been
performed.

The original vector @var{vec} is modified will hold the new results.
Return two values: The modified @var{vec} itself and the new value of
the sum between the elements.
@end defun

@c page
@node random utils strings
@subsection Specialised string functions


The auxiliary library @library{random strings} exports bindings
specialised to handle strings and randomness sources; it is based on
both @library{random} and @library{strings}.  Arguments to the following
functions follow the same conventions established for @library{strings}
and @library{strings low}.  @ref{strings convention, Interface
conventions}


@defun random-string-unfold-chars @var{integer-maker} @var{number-of-chars}
Given the closure @var{integer-maker} returning a random integer, build
and return a new string of @var{number-of-chars} random characters.

As a usage example, the following program will generate random passwords
with characters in the range of graphics @ascii{} codes (warning: for
real world applications, use a true random source):

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (random)
  (random strings)
  (char-sets))

(random-string-unfold-chars
  (lambda ()
    (do ((ch (random-integer 127) (random-integer 127)))
        ((char-set-contains? char-set:ascii/graphic
                             (integer->char ch))
         ch)))
  10)
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Function %random-string-shuffle @var{source} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-string-shuffle @var{S} @var{source}
Build a new string copying the selected substring, then shuffle it using
randomness from the given @var{source}.  Return the new string.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-string-shuffle! @var{source} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-string-shuffle! @var{S} @var{source}
Shuffle the selected substring using randomness from the given
@var{source}.  Return the shuffled string itself.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-string-sample @var{source} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-string-sample @var{S} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
randomly selected item from the selected substring, using randomness
from @var{source}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function %random-string-sample-population @var{source} @var{len} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-string-sample-population @var{S} @var{len} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
string of @var{len} items randomly selected from the selected substring
of @var{str}, using randomness from @var{source}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node random generators
@section Auxiliary generators


@menu
* random generators mersenne::  The Mersenne twister.
* random generators marsaglia:: George Marsaglia's generators.
* random generators bbs::       Blum--Blum--Shub generator.
* random generators borosh::    Borosh generator.
* random generators cmrg::      Combined multiple recursive generator.
@end menu

@c page
@node random generators mersenne
@subsection The Mersenne twister


The Mersenne twister is a pseudorandom number generator developed in
1997 by Makoto Matsumoto and Takuji Nishimura:

@quotation
Matsumoto Makoto and Nishimura Takuji.  ``Mersenne twister: a
623--dimensionally equidistributed uniform pseudo--random number
generator''.  1998.  @acronym{ACM} Transactions on Modeling and Computer
Simulation.
@end quotation

@noindent
it provides for fast generation of very high--quality pseudorandom
numbers, having been designed specifically to rectify many of the flaws
found in older algorithms.  Its name derives from the fact that period
length is chosen to be a Mersenne prime@footnote{Wikipedia contributors,
``Mersenne twister'', Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mersenne_twister&oldid=299648661}
(accessed July 1, 2009).}.

The following bindings are exported by the @library{random mersenne}
library.


@defun make-random-source/mersenne
Build and return a new randomness source using the Mersenne generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 626, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/mersenne}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.

The @func{random-source-seed!} function for this generator, must be
applied tot a numbers maker returning integers representable with
@math{32} bits.
@end defun


@library{random mersenne} initialises the generator drawing @math{32}
bits integer numbers from a specifically built MRG32k3a randomness
source, which in turn is initialised with the default @library{random}
seeds.  @ref{random mrg32k3a, L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator}

@c page
@node random generators marsaglia
@subsection George Marsaglia's generators


The generators described here were posted by George Marsaglia in a
thread on @url{sci.stat.math} and @url{sci.crypt} starting on January,
12 1999.  The following bindings are exported by the @library{random
marsaglia} library.

For all the randomness sources, the @func{random-source-seed!} function
must be applied to a number maker returning integers representable with
@math{32} bits.


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/cong
Build and return a new randomness source using the CONG generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 2, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/cong}.  The other value is a single
integer representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/fib
Build and return a new randomness source using the FIB generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 3, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/fib}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/lfib4
Build and return a new randomness source using the LFIB4 generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 258, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/lfib4}.  The other values are
integers representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/kiss
Build and return a new randomness source using the KISS generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 5, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/kiss}.  The other values are
integers representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/mwc
Build and return a new randomness source using the MWC generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 3, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/mwc}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/shr3
Build and return a new randomness source using the SHR3 generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 2, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/shr3}.  The other value is an
integer representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/swb
Build and return a new randomness source using the SWB generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 261, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/swb}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Algorithms

Here is the core C language implementation of the generators, as posted
by Marsaglia (line wrapping added here, and small bits changed):

@example
#define znew    (z = 36969 * (z & 65535)        \
                   + (z >> 16))

#define wnew    (w = 18000 * (w & 65535)        \
                   + (w >> 16))

#define MWC     ((znew << 16) + wnew)

#define SHR3    (jsr ^= (jsr << 17),  \
                 jsr ^= (jsr >> 13),  \
                 jsr ^= (jsr << 5))

#define CONG    (jcong = 69069 * jcong + 1234567)

#define FIB     ((b = a + b),    \
                 (a = b - a))

#define KISS    ((MWC^CONG) + SHR3)

#define LFIB4   (c++,                           \
                 t[c] = t[c]                    \
                      + t[(uint8_t)(c +  58)]   \
                      + t[(uint8_t)(c + 119)]   \
                      + t[(uint8_t)(c + 178)])

#define SWB     (c++,                                   \
                 bro  = (x < y),                        \
                 t[c] = (x = t[(uint8_t)(c + 34)])      \
                           - (y = t[(uint8_t)(c + 19)]  \
                                + bro))

#define UNI   (KISS * 2.328306e-10)
#define VNI   (((int32_t) KISS) * 4.656613e-10)

#define UC    (uint8_t)   /* a cast operation */

/* Use random seeds to reset z, w, jsr, jcong, a, b,
   and the table t[256] */
uint32_t  z, w, jsr, jcong, a, b, t[256];

uint32_t  x=0, y=0, bro;
uint8_t   c=0;
@end example

What follows is the comment part of the original post by Marsaglia
himself, with minor editing for formatting purposes and porting to
Scheme (errors in the original text are probably present here, too):

@quotation
Any one of KISS, MWC, FIB, LFIB4, SWB, SHR3, or CONG can be used in an
expression to provide a random @math{32} bits integer.

The KISS generator (Keep It Simple Stupid) is designed to combine the
two multiply--with--carry generators in MWC with the @math{3}--shift
register SHR3 and the congruential generator CONG, using addition and
exclusive--or.  Period about @code{2^123}.  It is one of my favorite
generators.

The MWC generator concatenates two 16 bits multiply--with--carry
generators:

@example
x(n) = 36969 * x(n-1) + carry
y(n) = 18000 * y(n-1) + carry mod 2^16
@end example

@noindent
has period about @math{2^60} and seems to pass all tests of randomness.
A favorite stand--alone generator---faster than KISS, which contains it.

FIB is the classical Fibonacci sequence:

@example
x(n) = x(n-1) + x(n-2)
@end example

@noindent
but taken modulo @math{2^32}.  Its period is @math{3 * 2^31} if one of
its two seeds is odd and not @math{1 mod 8}.  It has little worth as a
@acronym{RNG} by itself, but provides a simple and fast component for
use in combination generators.

SHR3 is a @math{3}--shift--register generator with period @math{2^32 -
1}.  It uses:

@example
y(n) = y(n-1) * (I + L^17) * (I + R^13) * (I+L^5)
@end example

@noindent
with the @math{y} viewed as binary vectors, @math{L} the @math{32 x 32}
binary matrix that shifts a vector left @math{1}, and @math{R} its
transpose.  SHR3 seems to pass all tests except those related to the
binary rank test, since @math{32} successive values, as binary vectors,
must be linearly independent, while @math{32} successive truly random 32
bits integers, viewed as binary vectors, will be linearly independent
only about 29% of the time.

CONG is a congruential generator with the widely used @math{69069}
multiplier:

@example
x(n) = 69069 * x(n-1) + 1234567
@end example

@noindent
it has period @math{2^32}.  The leading half of its @math{32} bits seem
to pass tests, but bits in the last half are too regular.

LFIB4 is an extension of what I have previously defined as a lagged
Fibonacci generator:

@example
x(n) = x(n-r) op x(n-s)
@end example

@noindent
with the @math{x} in a finite set over which there is a binary operation
@math{op}, such as @math{+}, @math{-} on integers modulo @math{2^32},
@math{*} on odd such integers, exclusive-or(xor) on binary vectors.

Except for those using multiplication, lagged Fibonacci generators fail
various tests of randomness, unless the lags are very long.  (See SWB
below).  To see if more than two lags would serve to overcome the
problems of @math{2}-lag generators using @math{+}, @math{-} or
@math{xor}, I have developed the @math{4}--lag generator LFIB4 using
addition:

@example
x(n) = [x(n-256) + x(n-179) + x(n-119) + x(n-55)] mod 2^32
@end example

@noindent
its period is @math{2^31 * (2^256 - 1)}, about @math{2^287}, and it
seems to pass all tests---in particular, those of the kind for which
@math{2}-lag generators using @math{+}, @math{-}, @math{xor} seem to
fail.  For even more confidence in its suitability, LFIB4 can be
combined with KISS, with a resulting period of about @math{2^410}: Just
use:

@example
(let* ((kiss       (make-random-source/marsaglia/kiss))
       (cong       (make-random-source/marsaglia/cong))
       (k-integers (random-source-integers-maker kiss))
       (c-integers (random-source-integers-maker cong))
       (integers   (lambda (U M)
                     (mod (+ (k-integers U)
                             (c-integers U))
                          M))))
  ---)
@end example

@noindent
in any Scheme expression.

SWB is a subtract--with--borrow generator that I developed to give a
simple method for producing extremely long periods:

@example
x(n) = [x(n-222) - x(n-237) - borrow] mod 2^32
@end example

@noindent
the @code{borrow} is @math{0}, or set to @math{1} if computing
@math{x(n-1)} caused overflow in 32 bits integer arithmetic. This
generator has a very long period, @math{2^7098 * (2^480 - 1)}, about
@math{2^7578}.  It seems to pass all tests of randomness, except for the
Birthday Spacings test, which it fails badly, as do all lagged Fibonacci
generators using @math{+}, @math{-} or @math{xor}.

I would suggest combining SWB with KISS, MWC, SHR3, or CONG.  KISS+SWB
has period @math{>2^7700} and is highly recommended.
Subtract--with--borrow has the same local behaviour as lagged Fibonacci
using @math{+}, @math{-}, @math{xor}---the borrow merely provides a much
longer period.  SWB fails the birthday spacings test, as do all lagged
Fibonacci and other generators that merely combine two previous values
by means of @math{+}, @math{-} or @math{xor}.  Those failures are for a
particular case: @math{m = 512} birthdays in a year of @math{n = 2^24}
days.  There are choices of @math{m} and @math{n} for which lags
@math{>1000} will also fail the test.  A reasonable precaution is to
always combine a @math{2}-lag Fibonacci or SWB generator with another
kind of generator, unless the generator uses @math{*}, for which a very
satisfactory sequence of odd @math{32} bits integers results.

The classical Fibonacci sequence @math{mod 2^32} from FIB fails several
tests.  It is not suitable for use by itself, but is quite suitable for
combining with other generators.

The last half of the bits of CONG are too regular, and it fails tests
for which those bits play a significant role.  CONG+FIB will also have
too much regularity in trailing bits, as each does.  But keep in mind
that it is a rare application for which the trailing bits play a
significant role.  CONG is one of the most widely used generators of the
last @math{30} years, as it was the system generator for VAX and was
incorporated in several popular software packages, all seemingly without
complaint.
@end quotation

The generators are seeded as follows:

@table @asis
@item CONG
The seed values are:

@example
jcong = 2524969849
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{1529210297}.

@item FIB
The seed values are:

@example
a =  9983651
b = 95746118
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{3519793928}.

@item KISS
The seed values are:

@example
jcong = 1017008441
jsr   = 3259917390
w     =   99545079
z     = 2247183469
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{1372460312}.

@item LFIB4
The seed values are stored in a vector of length 256, holding @math{32}
bits representable integers; the index into the vector is set to @code{c
= 0}.  The seed values of the vector are precomputed, see the source
code of the library.

With this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{1064612766}.

@item MWC
The seed values are:

@example
w = 1046675282
z = 2374144069
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{904977562}.

@item SHR3
The seed values are:

@example
jsr = 4176875757
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{2642725982}.

@item SWB
The seed values are stored in a vector of length 256, holding @math{32}
bits representable integers; the index into the vector is set to @code{c
= 64}.  The seed values of the vector are precomputed, see the source
code of the library.

With this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{627749721}.
@end table

@c page
@node random generators bbs
@subsection Blum--Blum--Shub generator


Blum--Blum--Shub is a @acronym{PRNG} proposed in:

@quotation
Lenore Blum, Manuel Blum, Michael Shub.  ``A Simple Unpredictable
Pseudo--Random Number Generator'', SIAM Journal on Computing, volume 15,
page 364-383, May 1986.
@end quotation

@noindent
when seeded with prime numbers satisfying the specified requirements, it
can be considered a cryptographically secure @acronym{PRNG}.  The search
of such prime numbers is a delicate and complex task; we have to turn to
specialised literature to learn how to do it.

The following bindings are exported by the @library{random
blum-blum-shub} library.  The library makes no attempt to validate the
seed numbers for the cryptographic requirements, it just implements the
@acronym{PRNG} algorithm; attaining cryptographic security is entirely
on our shoulders.


@defun make-random-source/blum-blum-shub
Build and return a new randomness source using the BBS generator.  The
returned randomness source is @strong{not} seeded; this is because
seeding a cryptographically secure generator must be done with care, and
it makes no sense to have a default seed.  The first operation after the
creation of the source should be to seed it.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 5, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/blum-blum-shub}.  The other values are integer
numbers.

The @func{random-source-seed!} function for this generator, must be
applied to a numbers maker returning:

@enumerate
@item
The value of the prime number @math{P}.

@item
The value of the prime number @math{Q}.

@item
Integers numbers until one is found whose GCD with @math{P * Q} is
@math{1}.
@end enumerate

@noindent
see the algorithm details below.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The algorithm

BBS generates a sequence of bits, not of numbers.  Bits can be
concatenated to yield numbers of any sort in base 2.  Seeding goes like
this:

@enumerate
@item
Select two prime numbers @math{P} and @math{Q} and compute @math{M = P *
Q}, which will be the modulus of the internally generated integers.
These primes are the ``secret'' of the generated sequence of
pseudo--random integers; for cryptographic purposes they have to be kept
hidden.

@item
Generate (using another @acronym{PRNG}) random integers @math{S} until
one is found such that: The greatest commond divisor (GCD) between
@math{S} and @math{M} is @math{1}.  Notice that @rnrs{6} Scheme
implementations already provide a @func{gcd} function.  @ref{baselib
math ops arithmetic, Arithmetic operations}

@item
Compute the seed @math{X}:

@example
X = (S * S) mod M
@end example
@end enumerate

The generator in @library{random blum-blum-shub} computes a new integer
@math{N} representable with @math{32} bits, from an initial state
@math{X} with the following formulation:

@example
X0 = (X * X) mod M
b0 = parity(X0)

X1 = (X0 * X0) mod M
b1 = parity(X1)

X2 = (X1 * X1) mod M
b2 = parity(X2)

...
@end example

@noindent
where @math{b(k)} are the bits of @math{N}, with @math{0 <= k < 32}, and
@math{X32} is the new state of the generator.  The function
@math{parity(X)} is the number of bits set to @math{1} in @math{X},
modulo @math{2}.

@c page
@node random generators borosh
@subsection Borosh generator


This generator is called @dfn{Borosh--Niederreiter}.  It was taken from:

@quotation
Donald E. Knuth.  ``The Art of Computer Programming''.  Volume 2.  Third
Edition.  Addison-Wesley.  Page 106-108.
@end quotation

@noindent
the following bindings are exported by the @library{random borosh}
library.


@defun make-random-source/borosh
Build and return a new randomness source using the
@dfn{Borosh--Niederreiter} generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 2, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/borosh}.  The other value is a single integer
representable with @math{32} bits.

The @func{random-source-seed!} function for this generator, must be
applied to a numbers maker returning integers representable with
@math{32} bits.
@end defun


@subsubheading The algorithm

The generator computes a new integer @math{N'} from an initial state
@math{N} with the following formulation:

@example
M = 2^32
A = 1812433253

N' = (A * N) mod M
@end example

@noindent
@library{random borosh} sets the initial state to @math{N = 1}.

@c page
@node random generators cmrg
@subsection Combined multiple recursive generator


This is a combined multiple recursive generator.  The algorithm was
derived from:@footnote{It is available from L'Ecuyer's home page
(@aurl{} last verified Tue Jul 14, 2009):

@center @url{http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~lecuyer/myftp/papers/combmrg.ps}
@center @url{ftp://ftp.iro.umontreal.ca/pub/simulation/lecuyer/papers/combmrg.ps}
}

@quotation
P.  L'Ecuyer.  ``Combined Multiple Recursive Random Number Generators''.
Operations Research, 44, 5 (1996), 816--822.
@end quotation

@noindent
the following bindings are exported by the @library{random cmrg}
library.


@defun make-random-source/cmrg
Build and return a new randomness source using a @acronym{CMRG}
generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 7, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/cmrg}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.

The @func{random-source-seed!} function for this generator, must be
applied to a numbers maker returning integers representable with
@math{32} bits.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The algorithm

The sequence is:

@example
N = (X0 - Y0) mod m1
@end example

@noindent
where the two underlying generators @math{X} and @math{Y} are:

@example
X0 = (A1 X1 + A2 X2 + A3 X3) mod M1
Y0 = (B1 Y1 + B2 X2 + B3 Y3) mod M2
@end example

@noindent
with coefficients:

@example
A1 = 0       A2 = 63308   A3 = -183326
B1 = 86098   B2 = 0       B3 = -539608
@end example

@noindent
and moduli:

@example
M1 = 2^31 - 1       = 2147483647
M2 = 2^31 - 2000169 = 2145483479
@end example

According to the paper the initial values for @math{X} must lie in the
range @math{0 <= X < M1} and the initial values for @math{Y} must lie in
the range @math{0 <= Y < M2}, with at least one non--zero value.
@library{random cmrg} initialises the generator with:

@example
X1 = 7   X2 = 17   X3 = 47
Y1 = 3   Y2 = 13   Y3 = 43
@end example

@noindent
and the seeding procedure implemented by the randomness source (through
@func{random-source-seed!}) will extract random numbers from the given
generator until it is @math{0 < X < M1} and @math{0 < Y < M2}.

@c page
@node random dist
@section Random numbers from known distributions


The following functions are exported by the @library{random
distributions} library.


@defun random-exponentials-maker @var{source}
Return a closure which, when applied to a real number argument @var{mu},
generates exponentially @math{exp(mu)} distributed random numbers using
randomness from @var{source}.
@end defun


@defun random-normals-maker @var{source}
Return a closure which, when applied to real number arguments @var{mu}
and @var{sigma}, generates normally distributed @math{N(mu, sigma)}
random numbers using randomness from @var{source}.
@end defun

@c page
@node format
@chapter Formatting strings


@menu
* format overview::             Overview of the package.
* format output::               Formatted Output.
* format escape values::        Escape sequences for generic values.
* format escape char::          Escape sequences for characters.
* format escape integers::      Escape sequences for integers.
* format escape flonums::       Escape sequences for flonums.
* format escape complex::       Escape sequences for complex numbers.
@end menu

@c page
@node format overview
@section Overview of the package


This package is a distribution of the @func{format} function written by
Dirk Lutzebaeck (@email{lutzeb@@cs.tu-berlin.de}), originally by Ken
Dickey and Aubrey Jaffer, included in the Guile distribution and later
adapted to @rnrs{6} Scheme by Marco Maggi.

This document is derived from the documentation of Guile, the @gnu{}
Ubiquitous Interface Language for Extensions.

The @func{format} function is a powerful way to print numbers, strings
and other objects together with literal text under the control of a
format string.  The function is exported by the @library{format-lib}
library.

@c page
@node format output
@section Formatted Output


A format string is generally more compact and easier than using just the
standard procedures like @func{display}, @func{write} and
@func{newline}.  Parameters in the output string allow various output
styles, and parameters can be taken from the arguments for runtime
flexibility.

@func{format} is similar to the Common Lisp procedure of the same name,
but it's not identical and doesn't have quite all the features found in
Common Lisp.

C programmers will note the similarity between @func{format} and
@cfunc{printf}, though escape sequences are marked with @code{~} instead
of @code{%}, and are more powerful.


@defun format fmt
@defunx format fmt [args@dots{}]
@defunx format dest fmt
@defunx format dest fmt [args@dots{}]
Write output specified by the @var{fmt} string to @var{dest}.

@var{dest} can be an output port, @true{} for
@func{current-output-port}, a number for @func{current-error-port}, or
@false{} to return the output as a string.  If @var{dest} is not given
(that is: the first argument is a string): the output is returned as if
@false{} is used as @var{dest} argument.

@var{fmt} can contain literal text to be output, and @code{~}
escapes.  Each escape has the form:

@example
~ [param [, param@dots{}] [:] [@@] code
@end example

@code{code} is a character determining the escape sequence; the
@code{code} letters are @strong{not} case--sensitive, upper and lower
case are the same.  The @code{:} and @code{@@} characters are optional
modifiers, one or both of which change the way various codes operate.
Optional parameters are accepted by some codes too.  Parameters have the
following forms,

@table @code
@item [+/-]number
An integer, with optional @code{+} or @code{-}.

@item '
The quote.  The following character in the format string, for instance
@code{'z} for @code{z}.

@item v
The next function argument as the parameter.  @code{v} stands for
``variable'', a parameter can be calculated at runtime and included in
the arguments.  Upper case @code{V} can be used too.

@item #
The number of arguments remaining.
@end table

Parameters are separated by commas (@code{,}).  A parameter can be left
empty to keep its default value when supplying later parameters.
@end defun

@c page
@node format escape values
@section Escape sequences for generic values


@deffn Escape ~a
@deffnx Escape ~s
Object output.  Parameters: @var{minwidth}, @var{padinc},
@var{minpad}, @var{padchar}.

@code{~a} outputs an argument like @code{display}, @code{~s}
outputs an argument like @code{write}.

@example
(format #t "~a" "foo") @print{} foo
(format #t "~s" "foo") @print{} "foo"
@end example

@code{~:a} and @code{~:s} put objects that don't have an external
representation in quotes like a string.

@example
(format #t "~:a" car) @print{} "#<primitive-procedure car>"
@end example

If the output is less than @var{minwidth} characters (default 0), it's
padded on the right with @var{padchar} (default space).  @code{~@@a}
and @code{~@@s} put the padding on the left instead.

@example
(format #f "~5a" 'abc)       @result{} "abc  "
(format #f "~5,,,'-@@a" 'abc) @result{} "--abc"
@end example

The number of padding characters, @var{padchar}, included in the output
is computed with: @math{@var{minpad} + @var{N} * @var{padinc}}, where
@var{n} is the smallest integer making the total object plus padding
greater than or equal to @var{minwidth}.  The default @var{minpad} is 0
and the default @var{padinc} is 1 (imposing no minimum or multiple).

@example
(format #f "~5,1,4a" 'abc) @result{} "abc    "
@end example
@end deffn


More examples:

@example
(check
    (format #f "ciao ~:a" display)
  => (cond-expand
      (ypsilon  "ciao \"#<subr display>\"")
      (larceny  "ciao \"#<PROCEDURE display>\"")
      (ikarus   "ciao \"#<procedure display>\""))

(check
    (list (format "~5a" 123)
          (format "~5s" 123))
  => '("123  "
       "123  "))

(check
    (list (format "~5@@a" 123)
          (format "~5@@s" 123))
  => '("  123"
       "  123"))

(check
    (list (format "~5,,,'.a" 123)
          (format "~5,,,'.s" 123))
  => '("123.."
       "123.."))

(check
    (list (format "~5,,,'.@@a" 123)
          (format "~5,,,'.@@s" 123))
  => '("..123"
       "..123"))

(check
    (list (format "~5,,4,'.@@a" 123)
          (format "~5,,4,'.@@s" 123))
  => '("....123"
       "....123"))
;;;     1234

(check
    (list (format "~10,,,'a@@a" 123)
          (format "~10,,,'a@@s" 123))
  => '("aaaaaaa123"
       "aaaaaaa123"))
;;;     1234567

(check
    (list (format "~10,3,,'u@@a" 123)
          (format "~10,3,,'u@@s" 123))
  => '("uuuuuuuuu123"
       "uuuuuuuuu123"))
;;;     123456789

(check
    (list (format "~11,2,,'u@@a" 123)
          (format "~11,2,,'u@@s" 123))
  => '("uuuuuuuu123"
       "uuuuuuuu123"))
;;;     12345678

(check
    (list (format "~8,2,,'u@@a" 1)
          (format "~8,2,,'u@@s" 1))
  => '("uuuuuuuu1"
       "uuuuuuuu1"))
;;;     12345678

@end example

@c page
@node format escape char
@section Escape sequences for characters


@deffn Escape ~c
Character.  Parameter: @var{charnum}.

Output a character.  The default is to simply output, as per
@func{write-char}.  @code{~@@c} prints in @func{write} style.
@code{~:c} prints control characters (@ascii{} 0 to 31) in @code{^X}
form.

@example
(format #t "~c" #\z)        @print{} z
(format #t "~@@c" #\z)       @print{} #\z
(format #t "~:c" #\newline) @print{} ^J
@end example

If the @var{charnum} parameter is given then an argument is not taken
but instead the character is @code{(integer->char @var{charnum})}.  This
can be used for instance to output characters given by their Unicode
code.

@example
(format #t "~65c")  @print{} A
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node format escape integers
@section Escape sequences for integers


@deffn Escape ~d
@deffnx Escape ~x
@deffnx Escape ~o
@deffnx Escape ~b
Integer.  Parameters: @var{minwidth}, @var{padchar}, @var{commachar},
@var{commawidth}.

Output an integer argument as a decimal, hexadecimal, octal or binary
integer (respectively).

@example
(format #t "~d" 123) @print{} 123
@end example

If the output is less than the @var{minwidth} parameter (default no
minimum), it's padded on the left with the @var{padchar} parameter
(default space).

@example
(format #t "~5,'*d" 12)   @print{} ***12
(format #t "~5,'0d" 12)   @print{} 00012
(format #t "~3d"    1234) @print{} 1234
@end example

The @code{@@} modifier causes a @code{+} sign to be prepended to
positive numbers, zero included.

@example
(format #t "~@@b" 12) @print{} +1100
(format #t "~@@d" 0)  @print{} +0
@end example

The @code{:} modifier adds a @var{commachar} (default comma) every
@var{commawidth} digits (default 3).

@example
(format #t "~:d" 1234567)         @print{} 1,234,567
(format #t "~10,'*,'/,2:d" 12345) @print{} ***1/23/45
@end example

Hexadecimal @code{~x} output is in lower case, but the @code{~(} and
@code{~)} case conversion directives described elsewhere can be used to
get upper case.

@example
(format #t "~x"       65261) @print{} feed
(format #t "~:@@(~x~)" 65261) @print{} FEED
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Escape ~r
Integer in words, roman numerals, or a specified radix.  Parameters:
@var{radix}, @var{minwidth}, @var{padchar}, @var{commachar},
@var{commawidth}.

With no parameters output is in words as a cardinal like ``ten'', or
@code{~:r} prints an ordinal like ``tenth''.

@example
(format #t "~r" 9)  @print{} nine        ;; cardinal
(format #t "~r" -9) @print{} minus nine  ;; cardinal
(format #t "~:r" 9) @print{} ninth       ;; ordinal
@end example

And also with no parameters, @code{~@@r} gives roman numerals and
@code{~:@@r} gives old roman numerals.  In old roman numerals
there's no ``subtraction'', so 9 is @code{VIIII} instead of
@code{IX}.  In both cases only positive numbers can be output.

@example
(format #t "~@@r" 89)  @print{} LXXXIX     ;; roman
(format #t "~:@@r" 89) @print{} LXXXVIIII  ;; old roman
@end example

When a parameter is given it means numeric output in the specified
@var{radix} (which can be any integer, @strong{not} only 2, 8, 10 or
16).  The modifiers and parameters following the radix are the same as
described for @code{~d} above.

@example
(format #f "~3r" 27)   @result{} "1000"    ;; base 3
(format #f "~3,5r" 26) @result{} "  222"   ;; base 3 width 5
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node format escape flonums
@section Escape sequences for flonums


@menu
* format escape flonums fixed::        Fixed point format.
* format escape flonums exponent::     Exponential format.
* format escape flonums eng::          Engineering format.
@end menu

@c page
@node format escape flonums fixed
@subsection Fixed point format


@deffn Escape @code{~f}
Real fixed--point float.  Parameters: @var{width}, @var{decimals},
@var{scale}, @var{overflowchar}, @var{padchar}.

Output a number or number string in fixed-point format, ie.@: with a
decimal point.

@example
(format #t "~f" 5)              @print{} 5.0
(format #t "~f" 1e-1)           @print{} 0.1
(format #t "~f" "123")          @print{} 123.0
(format #t "~f" "#d123")        @print{} 123.0
(format #t "~f" "#d-1e-1")      @print{} -0.1
@end example

@code{~@@f} prints a @code{+} sign on positive numbers (including
zero).

@example
(format #t "~@@f" 0) @print{} +0.0
@end example

If the output is less than @var{width} characters (default is no limit
and no padding) it's padded on the left with @var{padchar} (space by
default).  If the output equals or exceeds @var{width} then there's no
padding and the decimals after the comma are truncated if this makes the
number fit the @var{width}.

@example
(format "~6f" -1.5)                     @result{} "  -1.5"
(format "~6,,,,'*f" 23)                 @result{} "**23.0"
(format "~6f" 1234567.0)                @result{} "1234567.0"
(format "~10,,,,'.f" 123.456789123)     @result{} "123.456789"
(format "~5,,,,'.f" 1e9)                @result{} "1000000000.0"
(format "~5,,,,'.f" 1000000000.123456)  @result{} "1000000000.123456"
@end example

@var{decimals} is how many digits to print after the decimal point,
with the value rounded or padded with zeros as necessary.  (The
default is to output as many decimals as required.)

@example
(format #t "~1,2f" 3.125) @print{} 3.13
(format #t "~1,2f" 1.5)   @print{} 1.50
@end example

@noindent
Decimals are rounded only when requested.  If not requested they are not
rounded nor truncated when the output exceeds the requested @var{width}.

@example
(format #t "~1f"   0.123) @print{} "0.123")
(format #t "~1,2f" 0.123) @print{} ".12")
@end example

@var{scale} is a power of 10 applied to the value, moving the decimal
point that many places.  A positive @var{scale} increases the value
shown, a negative decreases it.

@example
(format #t "~,,2f" 1234)  @print{} 123400.0
(format #t "~,,-2f" 1234) @print{} 12.34
@end example

If @var{overflowchar} and @var{width} are both given and if the output
would exceed @var{width}, then that many @var{overflowchar}s are
printed instead of the value.

@example
(format #t "~5,,,'xf" 12345) @print{} 12345
(format #t "~4,,,'xf" 12345) @print{} xxxx
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node format escape flonums exponent
@subsection Exponential format


@deffn Escape ~e
Real exponential float.  Parameters: @var{width}, @var{decimals},
@var{expdigits}, @var{intdigits}, @var{overflowchar}, @var{padchar},
@var{expchar}.

Output a number or number string in exponential notation.

@example
(format #t "~e" 5000.25) @print{} 5.00025E+3
(format #t "~e" "123.4") @print{} 1.234E+2
(format #t "~e" "1e4")   @print{} 1.0E+4
@end example

@code{~@@e} prints a @code{+} sign on positive numbers (including
zero).  (This is for the mantissa, a @code{+} or @code{-} sign is
always shown on the exponent.)

@example
(format #t "~@@e" 5000.0) @print{} +5.0E+3
@end example

If the output is less than @var{width} characters it's padded on the
left with @var{padchar} (space by default).  The default for
@var{width} is to output with no padding.

@example
(format #f "~10e" 1234.0)       @result{} "  1.234E+3"
(format #f "~10,,,,,'*e" 0.5)   @result{} "****5.0E-1"
@end example

If the output is more than @var{width} characters: decimals in the
exponential representation are rounded to make the output fit the
@var{width}; if rounding does not make the output fit, the full output
without rounding is printed.  When @var{decimals} is specified: no
rounding is done to remove those decimals, even if the output exceeds
the @var{width}.

@example
;; here rounding succeeds in making the output fit
(format #f "~5e" 123456)        @result{} "1.E+5"

;; here rounding fails in making the output fit
(format #f "~2e" 123456)        @result{} "1.23456E+5"

;; here DECIMALS causes the output to overflow
(format "~6,3e" 123.3456)       @result{} "1.233E+2"
@end example

@var{decimals} is the number of digits shown in the mantissa after the
decimal point.  The value is rounded or trailing zeros are added as
necessary.  The default @var{decimals} is to show as much as needed by
the value.

@example
(format #f "~,3e" 11111.0) @result{} "1.111E+4"
(format #f "~,8e" 123.0)   @result{} "1.23000000E+2"
@end example

@var{expdigits} is the minimum number of digits shown for the
exponent, with leading zeros added if necessary.  The default for
@var{expdigits} is to show only as many digits as required.  At least
1 digit is always shown.

@example
(format #f "~,,1e" 1.0e99) @result{} "1.0E+99"
(format #f "~,,6e" 1.0e99) @result{} "1.0E+000099"
@end example

@var{intdigits} (default 1) is the number of digits to show before the
decimal point in the mantissa.  @var{intdigits} can be zero, in which
case the integer part is a single @code{0}, or it can be negative,
in which case leading zeros are shown after the decimal point.

@example
(format #t "~,,,3e" 12345.0)  @print{} 123.45E+2
(format #t "~,,,0e" 12345.0)  @print{} 0.12345E+5
(format #t "~,,,-3e" 12345.0) @print{} 0.00012345E+8
@end example

If @var{overflowchar} is given then @var{width} is a hard limit.  If the
output would exceed @var{width} then instead that many
@var{overflowchar}s are printed.

@example
(format #f "~6,,,,'xe" 100.0) @result{} "1.0E+2"
(format #f "~3,,,,'xe" 100.0) @result{} "xxx"
@end example

@var{expchar} is the exponent marker character (default @code{E}).

@example
(format #t "~,,,,,,'ee" 100.0) @print{} 1.0e+2
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node format escape flonums eng
@subsection Engineering format


@deffn Escape @code{~g}
@strong{FIXME} <to be written>
@end deffn

@c page
@node format escape complex
@section Escape sequences for complex numbers


@deffn Escape ~i
Complex fixed--point float.  Parameters: @var{width}, @var{decimals},
@var{scale}, @var{overflowchar}, @var{padchar}.

Output the argument as a complex number, with both real and imaginary
part shown (even if one or both are zero).

The parameters and modifiers are the same as for fixed--point @code{~f}
described above.  The real and imaginary parts are both output with the
same given parameters and modifiers, except that for the imaginary part
the @code{@@} modifier is always enabled, so as to print a @code{+} sign
between the real and imaginary parts.

@example
(format #t "~i" 1)  @print{} 1.0+0.0i
@end example

Notice that the imaginary unit character @code{i} is excluded from the
counting for width and padding.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~p}
Plural.  No parameters.

Output nothing if the argument is 1, or @samp{s} for any other
value.

@example
(format #t "enter name~p" 1) @print{} enter name
(format #t "enter name~p" 2) @print{} enter names
@end example

@code{~@@p} prints @samp{y} for 1 or @samp{ies} otherwise.

@example
(format #t "pupp~@@p" 1) @print{} puppy
(format #t "pupp~@@p" 2) @print{} puppies
@end example

@code{~:p} re-uses the preceding argument instead of taking a new
one, which can be convenient when printing some sort of count.

@example
(format #t "~d cat~:p" 9)   @print{} 9 cats
(format #t "~d pupp~:@@p" 5) @print{} 5 puppies
@end example

@code{~p} is designed for English plurals and there's no attempt to
support other languages.  @code{~[} conditionals (below) may be able to
help.  When using @code{gettext} to translate messages @code{ngettext}
is probably best though.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~y}
Pretty print.  No parameters.

Output an argument with @code{pretty-print}.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~?}
@deffnx Escape @code{~k}
Sub-format.  No parameters.

Take a format string argument and a second argument which is a list of
arguments for that string, and output the result.

@example
(format #t "~?" "~d ~d" '(1 2))    @print{} 1 2
@end example

@code{~@@?} takes arguments for the sub-format directly rather than
in a list.

@example
(format #t "~@@? ~s" "~d ~d" 1 2 "foo") @print{} 1 2 "foo"
@end example

@code{~?} and @code{~k} are the same, @code{~k} is provided for
T-Scheme compatibility.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~*}
Argument jumping.  Parameter: @var{N}.

Move forward @var{N} arguments (default 1) in the argument list.
@code{~:*} moves backwards.  (@var{N} cannot be negative.)

@example
(format #f "~d ~2*~d" 1 2 3 4) @result{} "1 4"
(format #f "~d ~:*~d" 6)       @result{} "6 6"
@end example

@code{~@@*} moves to argument number @var{N}.  The first argument is
number 0 (and that's the default for @var{N}).

@example
(format #f "~d~d again ~@@*~d~d" 1 2) @result{} "12 again 12"
(format #f "~d~d~d ~1@@*~d~d" 1 2 3)  @result{} "123 23"
@end example

A @code{#} move to the end followed by a @code{:} modifier move
back can be used for an absolute position relative to the end of the
argument list, a reverse of what the @code{@@} modifier does.

@example
(format #t "~#*~2:*~a" 'a 'b 'c 'd)   @print{} c
@end example

At the end of the format string the current argument postion doesn't
matter, any further arguments are ignored.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~t}
Advance to a column position.  Parameters: @var{colnum}, @var{colinc},
@var{padchar}.

Output @var{padchar} (space by default) to move to the given
@var{colnum} column.  The start of the line is column 0, the default
for @var{colnum} is 1.

@example
(format #f "~tX")  @result{} " X"
(format #f "~3tX") @result{} "   X"
@end example

If the current column is already past @var{colnum}, then the move is
to there plus a multiple of @var{colinc}, ie.@: column
@math{@var{colnum} + @var{N} * @var{colinc}} for the smallest @var{N}
which makes that value greater than or equal to the current column.
The default @var{colinc} is 1 (which means no further move).

@example
(format #f "abcd~2,5,'.tx") @result{} "abcd...x"
@end example

@code{~@@t} takes @var{colnum} as an offset from the current column.
@var{colnum} many pad characters are output, then further padding to
make the current column a multiple of @var{colinc}, if it isn't
already so.

@example
(format #f "a~3,5'*@@tx") @result{} "a****x"
@end example

@code{~t} is implemented using @code{port-column}, so it works even
there has been other output before @code{format}.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~~}
Tilde character.  Parameter: @var{n}.

Output a tilde character @code{~}, or @var{n} many if a parameter is
given.  Normally @code{~} introduces an escape sequence, @code{~~}
is the way to output a literal tilde.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~%}
Newline.  Parameter: @var{n}.

Output a newline character, or @var{n} many if a parameter is given.
A newline (or a few newlines) can of course be output just by
including them in the format string.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~&}
Start a new line.  Parameter: @var{n}.

Output a newline if not already at the start of a line.  With a
parameter, output that many newlines, but with the first only if not
already at the start of a line.  So for instance 3 would be a newline
if not already at the start of a line, and 2 further newlines.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~_}
Space character.  Parameter: @var{n}.

@c  For reference, in Common Lisp ~_ is a conditional newline, but
@c  slib fmtdoc.txi described it as a space, so we keep that.

Output a space character, or @var{n} many if a parameter is given.

With a variable parameter this is one way to insert runtime calculated
padding (@code{~t} or the various field widths can do similar
things).

@example
(format #f "~v_foo" 4) @result{} "    foo"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~/}
Tab character.  Parameter: @var{n}.

Output a tab character, or @var{n} many if a parameter is given.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~|}
Formfeed character.  Parameter: @var{n}.

Output a formfeed character, or @var{n} many if a parameter is given.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~!}
Force output.  No parameters.

At the end of output, call @code{force-output} to flush any buffers on
the destination.  @code{~!} can occur anywhere in the format string, but
the force is done at the end of output.

When output is to a string (destination @code{#f}), @code{~!} does
nothing.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~newline}
@c (ie.@: newline character)
Continuation line.  No parameters.

Skip this newline and any following whitespace in the format string,
ie.@: don't send it to the output.  This can be used to break up a
long format string for readability, but not print the extra
whitespace.

@example
(format #f "abc~
            ~d def~
            ~d" 1 2) @result{} "abc1 def2"
@end example

@code{~:newline} skips the newline but leaves any further whitespace
to be printed normally.

@code{~@@newline} prints the newline then skips following
whitespace.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape {~( ~)}
Case conversion.  No parameters.

Between @code{~(} and @code{~)} the case of all output is changed.
The modifiers on @code{~(} control the conversion.

@itemize @asis
@item @code{~(}
Lower case.
@c
@c  FIXME: The : and @ modifiers are not yet documented because the
@c  code applies string-capitalize and string-capitalize-first to each
@c  separate format:out-str call, which has various subtly doubtful
@c  effects.  And worse they're applied to individual characters,
@c  including literal characters in the format string, which has the
@c  silly effect of being always an upcase.
@c
@c  The Common Lisp spec is apparently for the capitalization to be
@c  applied in one hit to the whole of the output between ~( and ~).
@c  (This can no doubt be implemented without accumulating all that
@c  text, just by keeping a state or the previous char to tell whether
@c  within a word.)
@c
@c  @deffn Escape
@c  @code{:} --- first letter of each word upper case, the rest lower
@c  case, as per the @code{string-capitalize} function (@pxref{Alphabetic
@c  Case Mapping}).
@c  @deffn Escape
@c  @code{@@} --- first letter of just the first word upper case, the
@c  rest lower case.
@c
@item @code{~:@@(}
Upper case.
@end itemize

For example,

@example
(format #t "~(Hello~)")   @print{} hello
(format #t "~:@@(Hello~)") @print{} HELLO
@end example

In the future it's intended the modifiers @code{:} and @code{@@}
alone will capitalize the first letters of words, as per Common Lisp
@code{format}, but the current implementation of this is flawed and
not recommended for use.

Case conversions do not nest, currently.  This might change in the
future, but if it does then it will be to Common Lisp style where the
outermost conversion has priority, overriding inner ones (making those
fairly pointless).
@end deffn


@deffn Escape ~@{ ~@}
Iteration.  Parameter: @var{maxreps} (for @code{~@{}).

The format between @code{~@{} and @code{~@}} is iterated.  The
modifiers to @code{~@{} determine how arguments are taken.  The
default is a list argument with each iteration successively consuming
elements from it.  This is a convenient way to output a whole list.

@example
(format #t "~@{~d~@}"     '(1 2 3))       @print{} 123
(format #t "~@{~s=~d ~@}" '("x" 1 "y" 2)) @print{} "x"=1 "y"=2
@end example

@code{~:@{} takes a single argument which is a list of lists, each
of those contained lists gives the arguments for the iterated format.

@c  @print{} on a new line here to avoid overflowing page width in DVI
@example
(format #t "~:@{~dx~d ~@}" '((1 2) (3 4) (5 6)))
@print{} 1x2 3x4 5x6
@end example

@code{~@@@{} takes arguments directly, with each iteration
successively consuming arguments.

@example
(format #t "~@@@{~d~@}"     1 2 3)       @print{} 123
(format #t "~@@@{~s=~d ~@}" "x" 1 "y" 2) @print{} "x"=1 "y"=2
@end example

@code{~:@@@{} takes list arguments, one argument for each iteration,
using that list for the format.

@c  @print{} on a new line here to avoid overflowing page width in DVI
@example
(format #t "~:@@@{~dx~d ~@}" '(1 2) '(3 4) '(5 6))
@print{} 1x2 3x4 5x6
@end example

Iterating stops when there are no more arguments or when the
@var{maxreps} parameter to @code{~@{} is reached (default no
maximum).

@example
(format #t "~2@{~d~@}" '(1 2 3 4)) @print{} 12
@end example

If the format between @code{~@{} and @code{~@}} is empty, then a
format string argument is taken (before iteration argument(s)) and
used instead.  This allows a sub-format (like @code{~?} above) to be
iterated.

@example
(format #t "~@{~@}" "~d" '(1 2 3)) @print{} 123
@end example

@c  FIXME: What is the @code{:} modifier to ~} meant to do?  The
@c  Common Lisp spec says it's a minimum of 1 iteration, but the
@c  format.scm code seems to merely make it have MAXREPS default to 1.

Iterations can be nested, an inner iteration operates in the same way
as described, but of course on the arguments the outer iteration
provides it.  This can be used to work into nested list structures.
For example in the following the inner @code{~@{~d~@}x} is applied
to @code{(1 2)} then @code{(3 4 5)} etc.

@example
(format #t "~@{~@{~d~@}x~@}" '((1 2) (3 4 5))) @print{} 12x345x
@end example

See also @code{~^} below for escaping from iteration.
@end deffn


@deffn Escape {~[ ~; ~]}
Conditional.  Parameter: @var{selector}.

A conditional block is delimited by @code{~[} and @code{~]}, and
@code{~;} separates clauses within the block.  @code{~[} takes an
integer argument and that number clause is used.  The first clause is
number 0.

@example
(format #f "~[peach~;banana~;mango~]" 1)  @result{} "banana"
@end example

The @var{selector} parameter can be used for the clause number,
instead of taking an argument.

@example
(format #f "~2[peach~;banana~;mango~]") @result{} "mango"
@end example

If the clause number is out of range then nothing is output.  Or the
last clause can be @code{~:;} to use that for a number out of range.

@example
(format #f "~[banana~;mango~]"         99) @result{} ""
(format #f "~[banana~;mango~:;fruit~]" 99) @result{} "fruit"
@end example

@code{~:[} treats the argument as a flag, and expects two clauses.
The first is used if the argument is @code{#f} or the second
otherwise.

@example
(format #f "~:[false~;not false~]" #f)   @result{} "false"
(format #f "~:[false~;not false~]" 'abc) @result{} "not false"

(let ((n 3))
  (format #t "~d gnu~:[s are~; is~] here" n (= 1 n)))
@print{} 3 gnus are here
@end example

@code{~@@[} also treats the argument as a flag, and expects one
clause.  If the argument is @code{#f} then no output is produced and
the argument is consumed, otherwise the clause is used and the
argument is not consumed, it's left for the clause.  This can be used
for instance to suppress output if @code{#f} means something not
available.

@example
(format #f "~@@[temperature=~d~]" 27) @result{} "temperature=27"
(format #f "~@@[temperature=~d~]" #f) @result{} ""
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Escape @code{~^}
Escape.  Parameters: @var{val1}, @var{val2}, @var{val3}.

Stop formatting if there are no more arguments.  This can be used for
instance to have a format string adapt to a variable number of
arguments.

@example
(format #t "~d~^ ~d" 1)   @print{} 1
(format #t "~d~^ ~d" 1 2) @print{} 1 2
@end example

Within a @code{~@{} @code{~@}} iteration, @code{~^} stops the
current iteration step if there are no more arguments to that step,
but continuing with possible further steps and the rest of the format.
This can be used for instance to avoid a separator on the last
iteration, or to adapt to variable length argument lists.

@example
(format #f "~@{~d~^/~@} go"    '(1 2 3))     @result{} "1/2/3 go"
(format #f "~:@{ ~d~^~d~@} go" '((1) (2 3))) @result{} " 1 23 go"
@end example

@c  For reference, format.scm doesn't implement that Common Lisp ~:^
@c  modifier which stops the entire iterating of ~:{ or ~@:{.

@c  FIXME: Believe the Common Lisp spec is for ~^ within ~[ ~]
@c  conditional to terminate the whole format (or iteration step if in
@c  an iteration).  But format.scm seems to terminate just the
@c  conditional form.
@c
@c      (format #f "~[abc~^def~;ghi~] blah" 0)
@c      @result{} "abc blah"                    ;; looks wrong

@c  FIXME: Believe the Common Lisp spec is for ~^ within ~( ~) to end
@c  that case conversion and then also terminate the whole format (or
@c  iteration step if in an iteration).  But format.scm doesn't seem
@c  to do that quite right.
@c
@c      (format #f "~d ~^ ~d" 1)      @result{} "1 "
@c      (format #f "~(~d ~^ ~d~)" 1)  @result{} ERROR

Within a @code{~?} sub-format, @code{~^} operates just on that
sub-format.  If it terminates the sub-format then the originating
format will still continue.

@example
(format #t "~? items" "~d~^ ~d" '(1))   @print{} 1 items
(format #t "~? items" "~d~^ ~d" '(1 2)) @print{} 1 2 items
@end example

The parameters to @code{~^} (which are numbers) change the condition
used to terminate.  For a single parameter, termination is when that
value is zero (notice this makes plain @code{~^} equivalent to
@code{~#^}).  For two parameters, termination is when those two are
equal.  For three parameters, termination is when @math{@var{val1} <=
@var{val2}} and @math{@var{val2} <= @var{val3}}.
@end deffn


@c  FIXME: Good examples of these?

It's an error if there are not enough arguments for the escapes in the
format string, but any excess arguments are ignored.

Iterations @code{~@{} @code{~@}} and conditionals @code{~[}
@code{~;} @code{~]} can be nested, but must be properly nested,
meaning the inner form must be entirely within the outer form.  So
it's not possible, for instance, to try to conditionalize the endpoint
of an iteration.

@example
(format #t "~@{ ~[ ... ~] ~@}" ...)       ;; good
(format #t "~@{ ~[ ... ~@} ... ~]" ...)   ;; bad
@end example

The same applies to case conversions @code{~(} @code{~)}, they
must properly nest with respect to iterations and conditionals (though
currently a case conversion cannot nest within another case
conversion).

When a sub-format (@code{~?}) is used, that sub-format string must
be self-contained.  It cannot for instance give a @code{~@{} to
begin an iteration form and have the @code{~@}} up in the
originating format, or similar.

@c page
@node checks
@chapter Lightweight testing


The @library{checks} library provides a simple mechanism for testing
Scheme programs.  This library re--exports all the bindings from the
@library{debugging} library.  As a primitive example, the expression:

@example
(check (+ 1 1) => 3)
@end example

@noindent
evaluates the expression @code{(+ 1 1)} and compares the result with the
expected result @code{3} provided after the syntactic keyword @code{=>}.
Then the outcome of this comparison is reported in human--readable form
by printing a message of the form:

@example
(+ 1 1) @result{} 2 ; *** failed ***
; expected result: 3
@end example


@menu
* checks select::               Selecting tests to be run.
* checks eval::                 Evaluating code.
* checks result::               Handling multiple results.
@end menu

@c page
@node checks select
@section Selecting tests to be run


As usage example, let's assume that the system environment variable
@env{CHECK_TEST_NAME} is set to @code{yellow}:

@example
(parameterise ((check-test-name 'yellow))

  ;; this is evaluated
  (check
      (do-something)
    => 123)

  ;; this is evaluated, too
  (check
      (do-some-other-thing)
    => 456))

(parameterise ((check-test-name 'blue))

  ;; this is NOT evaluated
  (check
      (do-something)
    => #t)

  ;; this is NOT evaluated
  (check
      (do-some-other-thing)
    => #f))

;; this is evaluated
(check "yellow-one"
    (do-something)
  => 123)

;; this is NOT evaluated
(check 'red
    (do-something)
  => #t)
@end example


@defvr {Environment Variable} CHECK_TEST_NAME
The system environment variable used to select tests in a test suite
file.  The value of the variable must be the name, or the prefix of the
name, or the suffix of the name, of one or more tests.
@end defvr


@deffn Parameter check-test-name
Holds the name of the current test or tests.  Must be set to @false{}, a
string or a symbol.
@end deffn

@c page
@node checks eval
@section Evaluating code


@deffn Syntax check @var{expr} (=> @var{equal}) @var{expected}
@deffnx Syntax check @var{expr} => @var{expected}
@deffnx Syntax check @var{name} @var{expr} (=> @var{equal}) @var{expected}
@deffnx Syntax check @var{name} @var{expr} => @var{expected}
Evaluate @var{expr} and compare the value to the value of @var{expected}
using the predicate @var{equal}, which is @func{equal?} when omitted.
Then a report is printed according to the current mode setting (see
below) and the outcome is recorded in a global state to be used in
@func{check-report}.

The precise order of evaluation is that first @var{equal} and
@var{expected} are evaluated (in unspecified order) and then @var{expr}
is evaluated.  Example: @code{(check (+ 1 1) => 2)}.

When @var{name} is given: it is the name of this test, @ref{checks
select, Selecting tests to be run}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax check-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expr} (=> @var{equal}) @var{expected} (@var{argument*})
@deffnx Syntax check-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expr} => @var{expected} (@var{argument*})
@deffnx Syntax check-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expr} (=> @var{equal}) @var{expected}
@deffnx Syntax check-ec @meta{qualifier} ... @var{expr} => @var{expected}
An eager comprehension for executing a parametric sequence of checks.
To use this syntax we have to import the @library{loops} library.

Enumerate the sequence of bindings specified by the @meta{qualifier}
syntaxes.  For each binding evaluate @var{equal} and @var{expected} in
unspecified order. Then evaluate @var{expr} and compare the value
obtained to the value of @var{expected} using the value of @var{equal}
as predicate, which is @func{equal?} when omitted.

The comprehension stops after the first failed check, if there is any.
Then a report is printed according to the current mode setting (see
below) and the outcome is recorded in a global state to be used in
@func{check-report}.  The entire @func{check-ec} counts as a single
check.

In case the check fails @var{argument*} is used for constructing an
informative message with the argument values.  Use @var{argument*} to
list the relevant free variables of @var{expr} (see examples) that you
want to have printed.

A @meta{qualifier} is any qualifier of an eager comprehension.

Examples:

@example
(check-ec (: e 100)
          (positive? (expt 2 e))
          => #t (e)) ; fails on fixnums

(check-ec (: e 100)
          (:let x (expt 2.0 e))
          (= (+ x 1) x)
          => #f (x)) ; fails

(check-ec (: x 10)
          (: y 10)
          (: z 10)
          (* x (+ y z))
          => (+ (* x y) (* x z))
             (x y z)) ; passes with 10^3 cases checked
@end example
@end deffn


@defun check-report
Print a summary and the first failed check, if there is any, depending
on the current mode settings.
@end defun


@defun check-set-mode! @var{mode}
Set the current mode to @var{mode}, which must be a symbol among:
@code{off}, @code{summary}, @code{report-failed}, @code{report}; the
default is @code{report}.  Note that you can change the mode at any
time, and that @func{check}, @func{check-ec} and @func{check-report} use
the current value.

The mode symbols have the following meaning:

@table @code
@item off
do not execute any of the checks;

@item summary
print only summary in @func{check-report} and nothing else;

@item report-failed
report failed checks when they happen, and in summary;

@item report
report every example executed.
@end table
@end defun


@defun check-reset!
Reset the global state (counters of correct/failed examples) to the
state immediately after loading the module for the first time, i.e. no
checks have been executed.
@end defun


@defun check-passed? @var{expected-total-count}
Return @true{} if there were no failed checks and
@var{expected-total-count} correct checks, @false{} otherwise.

Rationale: This procedure can be used in automatized tests by
terminating a test program with the statement:

@example
(exit (if (check-passed? n) 0 1))
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Syntax false-if-exception @var{form0} @var{form} ...
Evaluate all the @var{form}s as in @func{begin}.  If an exception is
raised: return @false{}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax check-for-true @var{expr}
@deffnx Syntax check-for-true @var{name} @var{expr}
@deffnx Syntax check-for-false @var{expr}
@deffnx Syntax check-for-false @var{name} @var{expr}
Evaluate @var{expr} in a @func{check} form, expecting a non--false or
@false{} value as result.

When @var{name} is given: it is the name of this test, @ref{checks
select, Selecting tests to be run}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node checks result
@section Handling multiple results


@deffn Syntax with-result @var{form0} @var{form} ...
Evaluate all the @var{form}s, as in @func{begin}, in a dynamic
environment in which an implicit result variable is defined.  The
implicit variable is handled as a list.

Return a list whose first value is the return value of the last
@var{form} and whose second value is the value of the implicit variable.
@end deffn


@defun add-result @var{obj}
Append @var{obj} to the list in the implicit variable defined by
@func{with-result}.
@end defun


@defun get-result
Return the current value of the implicit variable defined by
@func{with-result}.
@end defun


@c page
@node debugging
@chapter Debugging utilities


The @library{debugging} library provide simple utilities to help
debugging.  All the following bindings are re--exported by the
@library{checks} library.


@deffn Parameter debugging
When set to true @func{debug} will print its message.  It is initialised
to @false{}.
@end deffn


@defun debug @var{string}
@defunx debug @var{format-string} @var{arg} ...
If the @code{debugging} parameter is set to true, print @var{string} to
the current error port, or hand @var{format-string} and the optional
@var{arg} values to @func{format} and print the result to the current
error port.
@end defun


@defun debug-print-condition @var{message} @var{exc}
A wrapper for @func{debug} that prints @var{message} and does its best
to print @var{exc}, which must be a Scheme condition value.
@end defun

@c page
@node queues
@chapter Simple queue


The functions in this section are exported by the @library{queues}
library.  This module implements queues holding arbitrary scheme objects
and designed for efficient first--in/first--out operations.

@func{make-q} creates a queue, and objects are entered and removed with
@func{enq!} and @func{deq!}.  @func{q-push!} and @func{q-pop!} can be
used too, treating the front of the queue like a stack.


@defun make-q
Return a new queue.
@end defun

@defun q? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a queue, or @false{} if not.

Note that queues are not a distinct class of objects but are implemented
with cons cells.  For that reason certain list structures can get
@true{} from @func{q?}.
@end defun


@defun {enq!} @var{q} @var{obj}
Add @var{obj} to the rear of @var{q}, and return @var{q}.
@end defun


@defun {deq!} @var{q}
@defunx {q-pop!} @var{q}
Remove and return the front element from @var{q}.  If @var{q} is empty,
a @code{q-empty} exception is thrown.

@func{deq!} and @func{q-pop!} are the same operation, the two names just
let an application match @func{enq!} with @func{deq!}, or @func{q-push!}
with @func{q-pop!}.
@end defun


@defun {q-push!} @var{q} @var{obj}
Add @var{obj} to the front of @var{q}, and return @var{q}.
@end defun


@defun q-length @var{q}
Return the number of elements in @var{q}.
@end defun


@defun {q-empty?} @var{q}
Return true if @var{q} is empty.
@end defun


@defun q-empty-check @var{q}
Throw a @code{q-empty} exception if @var{q} is empty.
@end defun


@defun q-front @var{q}
Return the first element of @var{q} (without removing it).  If @var{q}
is empty, a @code{q-empty} exception is thrown.
@end defun


@defun q-rear @var{q}
Return the last element of @var{q} (without removing it).  If @var{q} is
empty, a @code{q-empty} exception is thrown.
@end defun


@defun q-remove! @var{q} @var{obj}
Remove all occurences of @var{obj} from @var{q}, and return @var{q}.
@var{obj} is compared to queue elements using @code{eq?}.
@end defun


The @code{q-empty} exceptions described above are thrown just as
@code{(raise 'q-empty)}, there's no message etc like an error throw.

A queue is implemented as a cons cell, the @code{car} containing a list
of queued elements, and the @code{cdr} being the last cell in that list
(for ease of enqueuing).

@example
(@var{list} . @var{last-cell})
@end example

@noindent
If the queue is empty, @var{list} is the empty list and @var{last-cell}
is @false{}.

An application can directly access the queue list if desired, for
instance to search the elements or to insert at a specific point.

@defun {sync-q!} @var{q}
Recompute the @var{last-cell} field in @var{q}.

All the operations above maintain @var{last-cell} as described, so
normally there's no need for @func{sync-q!}.  But if an application
modifies the queue @var{list} then it must either maintain
@var{last-cell} similarly, or call @func{sync-q!} to recompute it.
@end defun

@c page
@node object-properties
@chapter Object properties


An @dfn{object property} is a convenient interface to an @func{eq?}
hashtable.  It is a function that can be called with one or two
arguments.  When called with two arguments: the first is an object and
the second is its property value; they are stored in the hashtable.
When called with one argument: the hashtable is queried using the
argument as key, and the value is returned.  Object properties are
implemented by the library @library{object-properties}.

@quotation
The idea of  object properties implemented in this library comes from
Guile, the @gnu{} Ubiquitous Interface Language for Extensions.
@end quotation


@defun make-object-property
Build and return a new object property.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax with-true-property (@var{prop} @var{object}) @var{form0} @var{form} ...
Temporarily save the value of @var{object} in @var{prop} and set it to
@true{}, then evaluate the @var{form}s and restore the original value.
@end deffn


@deffn Parameter object-property-initial-capacity
An integer representing the initial size of the hashtable.  The default
value is 100.
@end deffn


@deffn Parameter object-property-default-value
The value to return if the property is queried for an object that was
not registered before.  The default value is @false{}.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Examples

The following will evaluate successfully:

@example
(import (scheme)
  (uriel object-property)
  (checks)
  (srfi parameters))

(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

(check
    (let ((prop (make-object-property))
          (a (vector 1 2 3))
          (b (vector 4 5 6))
          (c (vector 7 8 9)))
      (prop a 1)
      (prop b 2)
      (list (prop a) (prop b) (prop c)))
  => '(1 2 #f))

(check
    (let ((prop (parameterize ((object-property-initial-capacity 10)
                               (object-property-default-value 'quack))
                  (make-object-property)))
          (a (vector 1 2 3))
          (b (vector 4 5 6))
          (c (vector 7 8 9)))
      (prop a 1)
      (prop b 2)
      (list (prop a) (prop b) (prop c)))
  => '(1 2 quack))

(check-report)
@end example

@c page
@node cleanup-handlers
@chapter Cleaning up


On Scheme implementations that provide guardians (like Ikarus) there is
the need to invoke the guardian function, every now and then, to release
guarded resources that were garbage collected.  For example: if the
program makes use of an event loop, we can enqueue a periodic, batch,
event that invokes a cleanup function.

We may have code like this:

@example
(define block-guardian (make-guardian))

(define (block-cleanup)
  (do ((p (block-guardian) (block-guardian)))
      ((not p))
    (primitive-free p)))
@end example

@noindent
and allocate memory with:

@example
(define (malloc/guarded size)
  (let ((p (malloc size)))
    (block-guardian p)
    p))
@end example

@noindent
whenever the values returned by @func{malloc/guarded} are garbage
collected: they will be made available as return values from the
guardian function, so we can invoke @func{block-cleanup} to free them.

Of course, with code like this, we need a guardian for each type of
resource, or, to be more precise, a guardian for each destructor
(@func{primitive-free} in the example).

To make it simpler to invoke all the cleanup functions, the library
@library{cleanup-handlers} provides an interface to register them and
invoke them in sequence.


@defun register-cleanup-function @var{thunk}
Register @var{thunk} in the internal list of cleanup functions.
@end defun


@defun forget-cleanup-function @var{thunk}
Remove @var{thunk} from the internal list of cleanup functions.
@end defun


@defun cleanup
Invoke all the functions registered in the internal list of cleanup
functions.  Every function is invoked with no arguments.
@end defun


@quotation
@emph{Note:} This library implements no event loop.  The only way to
invoke a cleanup thunk only once is to register it, invoke
@func{cleanup}, then remove it.  This is usually not what we want to do
to handle such a simple case: we should use a proper event loop,
instead.
@end quotation

@c page
@node combinators
@chapter Combinators


The following combinators are exported by @library{combinators}.


@deffn Syntax K @var{form} . @var{forms}
Evaluate all the forms like the standard @func{begin}, but return the
value of the first form.

@example
(define-syntax K
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?expr0 ?expr ...)
     (call-with-values
         (lambda () ?expr0)
       (lambda x
         ?expr ...
         (apply values x))))))
@end example

This is the same as the @func{begin0} syntax.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax Y @var{func}
Build a recursive function with no name.

@example
(define-syntax Y
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?func)
     (let ((F ?func))
       ((lambda (f)
          (F (lambda (. args)
               (apply (f f) args))))
        (lambda (f)
          (F (lambda (. args)
               (apply (f f) args)))))))))
@end example

The combinator has to called like this:

@example
((Y (lambda (f)
      (lambda (. args)
        (do-something-with-args args)
        (if (condition) (f args))))
    arg1 arg2 ...))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax S @var{x} @var{y} @var{z}
The S combinator:

@example
(define-syntax S
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?x ?y ?z)
     (let ((Z ?z))
       (?x Z (?y Z))))))
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node compensations
@chapter Compensation stacks


This section describes a form that implements compensation stacks:
syntactic sugar that allows us to write code that allocates a resource
near the code that releases it in case of error.

@quotation
Compensation stacks are described in: @emph{Finding and Preventing
Run-Time Error Handling Mistakes}, by Westley Weimer, George C. Necula,
2004.  In Proceedings of the @acronym{ACM} Conference on
Object--Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications.
@end quotation

@menu
* compensations usage::         Basic compensations usage.
* compensations api::           Compensations @api{}.
@end menu

@c page
@node compensations usage
@section Basic compensations usage


A @dfn{compensation} is a chunk of code that undoes a resource
allocation performed in another chunk, example:

@example
(define port
  (open-file-input-port "/tmp/proof.1"))
@end example

@noindent
must be ''compensated'' by:

@example
(close-port port)
@end example

@noindent
with the compensations stack such code can be written:

@example
(with-compensations
  (letrec
      ((port (compensate
                 (open-file-input-port "/tmp/proof.1")
               (with
                 (close-port port)))))
    (make-use-of port)))
@end example

Compensation forms are embedded in a closure and pushed on a stack, so
that, in case of error, it is possible to evaluate them in
allocation--reversed order.

A form that makes use of a compensation stack looks like this:

@example
(with-compensations
    (compensate
        ALLOC-FORMS-1
      (with FREE-FORMS-1))
    (compensate
        ALLOC-FORMS-2
      (with FREE-FORMS-2))
  BODY-FORMS)
@end example

@noindent
both @func{with-compensations} and @func{compensate} are syntaxes.  If
no error occurs the order of evaluation is:

@example
ALLOC-FORMS-1
ALLOC-FORMS-2
BODY-FORMS
FREE-FORMS-2
FREE-FORMS-1
@end example

@noindent
if an error occurs in @code{BODY-FORMS}, the order of evaluation is:

@example
ALLOC-FORMS-1
ALLOC-FORMS-2
BODY-FORMS
FREE-FORMS-2
FREE-FORMS-1
@end example

@noindent
if an error occurs in @code{ALLOC-FORMS-2}, the order of evaluation is:

@example
ALLOC-FORMS-1
ALLOC-FORMS-2
FREE-FORMS-1
@end example

@noindent
if an error occurs in @code{ALLOC-FORMS-1}, the order of evaluation is:

@example
ALLOC-FORMS-1
@end example

@noindent
if an error occurs in @code{FREE-FORMS-1}, the order of evaluation is:

@example
ALLOC-FORMS-1
ALLOC-FORMS-2
BODY-FORMS
FREE-FORMS-2
FREE-FORMS-1
@end example

@noindent
if an error occurs in @code{FREE-FORMS-2}, the order of evaluation is:

@example
ALLOC-FORMS-1
ALLOC-FORMS-2
BODY-FORMS
FREE-FORMS-2
FREE-FORMS-1
@end example

So @func{with-compensations} tries to evaluate all the free forms,
despite errors.  Of course if an error occurs in the middle of a set of
forms:

@example
(first-form)   ;evaluated
(raise 'here)
(third-form)   ;not evaluated
@end example

@noindent
the forms before the error are evaluated, while the forms after the
error are not.

A variant of @func{with-compensations} exists to evaluate the
compensation forms only in case of error:

@example
(with-compensations/on-error
    (compensate
        ALLOC-FORMS-1
      (with FREE-FORMS-1))
    (compensate
        ALLOC-FORMS-2
      (with FREE-FORMS-2))
  BODY-FORMS)
@end example

@noindent
if no error occurs the order of evaluation is:

@example
ALLOC-FORMS-1
ALLOC-FORMS-2
BODY-FORMS
@end example

@noindent
while if an error occurs the evaluation is equal to the cases of
@func{with-compensations}.  The ``on error'' variant is useful in
constructors and initialisation functions, where we want to run the
compensations only if an error occurs; if no error is raised, we just
want the constructor to return.

@c page
@node compensations api
@section Compensations @api{}


@deffn Syntax compensate @var{alloc-form0} @var{alloc-form} @dots{} (with @var{release-form0} @var{release-form} @dots{})
Evaluate all the @var{alloc-form}s and, if no error occurs, push a
closure holding the @var{release-form}s on the current compensations
stack.  Return the return value of the last @var{alloc-form}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax with-compensations @var{form} @dots{}
@deffnx Syntax with-compensations/on-error @var{form} @dots{}
Initialise a new local compensations stack, then evaluate all the
@var{form}s.  If no error occurs, return the return value of the last
@var{form}.

@func{with-compensations} always invokes @func{run-compensations} after
the @var{form}s have been evaluated.

@func{with-compensations/on-error} invokes @func{run-compensations}
after the @var{form}s have been evaluated only if an exception was
raised.
@end deffn


@defun run-compensation
Evaluate all the compensation forms that are in the current stack, in
last in/first out order.  The compensations are evaluated in the body of
a @func{defer-exceptions}, so exceptions raised are handled as described
in @ref{deferred exceptions}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax push-compensation @var{release-form0} @var{release-form} ...
Push a closure holding the @var{release-form}s on the current
compensations stack.
@end deffn

@c page
@node deferred exceptions
@chapter Deferred exceptions


The @library{deferred-exceptions} library implements a mechanism to
handle nested exceptions.

@menu
* deferred exceptions intro::   Introduction.
* deferred exceptions usage::   Usage examples.
* deferred exceptions api::     Programming interface.
@end menu

@c page
@node deferred exceptions intro
@section Introduction


When a non--continuable exception is raised: the stack unwinds and some
mechanism is needed to release allocated resources that cannot be simply
garbage collected.  Some mechanism requires asynchronous evaluation of
cleanup code (guardians, for example), other mechanisms require
synchronous evaluation of cleanup code (@ref{compensations}, for
example).

With synchronous cleanup code: what happens if the cleanup code itself
raises an exception?  If this @emph{second level} exception is left
going: it replaces the original one (@emph{first level}), which is lost:

@example
(import (scheme))

(with-exception-handler
    (lambda (e)
      (raise 'second))
  (lambda ()
    (raise 'first)))
@end example

@noindent
outputs:

@example
Unhandled exception:
 Non-condition object: second
@end example

@noindent
@code{first} is never reported.  We rarely want this.

This section describes a form that can be used to save informations
about second level exceptions, for the case in which it is fine to try
to go on reporting the first level error.  With this form: second level
exceptions can be reported later to the user or logged to a file or
whatever.

This mechanism is automatically used by compensation stacks, which are
the reference use case (@ref{compensations}).

@c page
@node deferred exceptions usage
@section Usage examples


A form that uses deferred exceptions looks like this:

@example
(with-deferred-exceptions-handler
    (lambda (exc)
      (handle-the-exception exc))
  (lambda ()
    (before-do-something)
    (before-do-something)
    (defer-exceptions
      (do-something)
      (do-something))
    (after-do-something)
    (after-do-something)))
@end example

@noindent
if the forms in the @func{defer-exceptions} raise an exception: the
exception value is saved and evaluation goes on for the
@code{(after-do-something)} forms.  Then the @func{lambda} is applied to
the exception value.

Any number of @func{defer-exceptions} can be put in the same
@func{with-deferred-exceptions}.

@c page
@node deferred exceptions api
@section Programming interface


@deffn Syntax defer-exceptions @var{form} @dots{}
Evaluate all the @var{form}s as in the body of a @func{begin}.

If an exception is raised: its value is added to the list of exceptions
in the dynamic environment of the current deferred exception handler.

If @func{defer-exception} appears outside of a
@func{with-deferred-exception-handler} form: the exceptions are silently
discarded.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax with-deferred-exceptions-handler @var{handler} @var{thunk}
Setup a deferred exception handler dynamic environment, in which
@var{handler} is the exceptions handler, for the evaluation of
@var{thunk}.  If a deferred exception is raised
@func{run-deferred-exceptions-handler} is invoked.
@end deffn


@defun run-deferred-exceptions-handler
Apply the current deferred exceptions handler to each deferred exception
value in the current list.  If the handler raises an exception: it is
silently ignored.
@end defun

@c page
@node keywords
@chapter Keyword values


The @library{keywords} library implements a type of value,
@dfn{keywords}, disjoint from all the other types.  Keywords can be
treated much like symbols.


@deffn Syntax make-keyword @var{symbol}
@deffnx Function %make-keyword @var{symbol}
Build the macro and the function return a new keyword value associated
to the @var{symbol}.  The macro is a wrapper for the function, so the
following two forms are equivalent (notice the quoting):

@example
(make-keyword   alpha)
(%make-keyword 'alpha)
@end example

When this function is applied to the same symbol multiple times, it
returns the same keyword value; so those keywords are @func{eq?} to each
other.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-keyword @var{symbol}
Build a new keyword value using @func{make-keyword} upon @var{symbol},
then bind it to @var{symbol}.  Keyword values defined by
@func{define-keyword} can be, and are meant to be, exported by a library
if there is the need.
@end deffn


@defun keyword? @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a keyword value.
@end defun


@defun keyword->symbol @var{key}
@defunx symbol->keyword @var{str}
Convert a keyword to and from a symbol.
@end defun


@defun keyword->string @var{key}
@defunx string->keyword @var{str}
Convert a keyword to and from a string.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax with-keywords @var{keywords} @var{form0} @var{form} ...
Define a set of keywords while the forms are evaluated.  The following:

@example
(with-keywords (:a :b :c :d)
  ---)
@end example

@noindent
expands to:

@example
(let ((:a (make-keyword :a))
      (:b (make-keyword :b))
      (:c (make-keyword :c))
      (:d (make-keyword :d)))
  ---)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax let-keywords @var{options} @var{allow-unknown} ((@var{name} @var{key} @var{default}) ...) @var{form0} @var{form} ...
@deffnx Syntax let-keywords* @var{options} @var{allow-unknown} ((@var{name} @var{key} @var{default}) ...) @var{form0} @var{form} ...
These are @func{let} and @func{let*} like macros that allow parsing a
list of keyword/value couples in @var{options}.  All the @var{key}
arguments must be keywords already defined.

@enumerate
@item
First all the @var{default} expressions are evaluated and their results
bound to the @var{name} identifiers, like with @func{let} or
@func{let*}.

@item
Then @var{options} is parsed and the values associated to the @var{key}
keywords are assigned to the @var{name} variables.

@item
Finally the @var{form} arguments are evaluated like in a @func{begin}
form.  The @var{form} arguments are the region of the @var{name}
bindings.
@end enumerate

If @var{allow-unknown} is true: @var{options} can contain keywords not
included in the @var{key} list; else an error is raised.  Each keyword
in @var{options} must be followed by a value, else an error is raised.

Example:

@example
(with-keywords (:a :b :c :d)
  (define (doit . options)
    (let-keywords options #f
                  ((a :a #\a)
                   (b :b #\b)
                   (c :c #\c)
                   (d :d #\d))
      (list a b c d)))

  (doit :a 1 :b 2 :d 4))
@result{} (1 2 #\c 4)
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node sentinel
@chapter The sentinel value


The @library{sentinel} library defines a unique value and a predicate to
test it.  The sentinel value can be used as terminator for sequences or
as value for uninitialised storage locations.


@deffn Constant sentinel
The sentinel value.
@end deffn


@defun sentinel? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is the sentinel value.
@end defun


As usage example, the following form makes use of the sentinel as
terminator for a list:

@example
(let ((ell (list 1 2 3 4 5 sentinel)))
  (let loop ((ell ell)
             (res '()))
    (if (sentinel? (car ell))
        res
      (loop (cdr ell) (cons (car ell) res)))))
@result{} (5 4 3 2 1))
@end example

@noindent
the following form defines an iterator closure using the sentinel to
signal the end of the iteration:

@example
(let* ((ell  '(1 2 3 4 5))
       (iter (lambda ()
               (let ((ell ell))
                 (if (null? ell)
                     sentinel
                   (begin
                     (car ell)
                     (set! ell (cdr ell))))))))
  (let loop ((res '()))
    (let ((v (iter)))
      (if (sentinel? v)
          res
        (loop (cons v res))))))
@result{} (5 4 3 2 1)
@end example


@defun make-sentinel
Return a new sentinel value.  @func{sentinel?} will return @true{} when
applied to such a value, but new sentinel values are meant to be checked
with @func{eq?}.

New sentinels can be used in situations where a unique terminator is
needed: When we need to distinguish @samp{sentinel} from a temporary
sentinel we need for a specific operation.
@end defun

@c page
@node variables
@chapter Defining storage locations


The @library{variables} library provides a way to define simple storage
locations similar to the variables used in many languages.  The
@dfn{variable} type of value is disjoint from the other types.


@defun make-variable
@defunx make-variable @var{obj}
Build and return a new variable value.  The variable is initialised to
@var{obj}, which defaults to the sentinel.  @ref{sentinel, The
sentinel value}
@end defun


@defun variable? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a variable value.
@end defun


@defun variable-set! @var{variable} @var{obj}
@defunx variable-ref @var{variable}
Setter and getter for variables.
@end defun


It is possible to access variables' slots using identifier syntaxes:

@example
(define-syntax define-variable
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?name)
     (define-variable/test ?name sentinel))
    ((_ ?name ?value)
     (define ?name (make-variable ?value)))))

(define-syntax v
  (identifier-syntax
     (_
      (variable-ref  the-var))
     ((set! _ ?e)
      (variable-set! the-var ?e))))

(define-variable the-var 123)

v @result{} 123
(set! v 456)
v @result{} 456
@end example

@noindent
a more sophisticated of this is the @func{define-variable} syntax
exported by @library{variables}.


@deffn Syntax define-variable @var{name}
@deffnx Syntax define-variable @var{name} @var{obj}
@deffnx Syntax define-variable (@var{name} . @meta{formals}) @meta{body}
Like @func{define}, but stores the value in a newly built variable which
is then bound to @var{name}.  Example:

@example
(define-variable the-var 123)

v @result{} 123
(set! v 456)
v @result{} 456
@end example

The difference between @func{define-syntax} and @func{define}, is that
@func{define} only defines a binding which cannot be modified, while
@func{define-syntax} allocates a storage location, so the value bound to
@var{name} can be modified at will.
@end deffn

@c page
@node records
@chapter Record utilities


The following bindings are exported by the @library{records} library.
In the following descriptions, the argument @var{rtd} is a record type
desriptor.

@menu
* records parents::             Records parents list.
* records makers::              Automatically generated makers.
* records fields::              Binding accessors and mutators.
@end menu

@c page
@node records parents
@section Records parents list


@deffn Function record-precedence-list @var{rtd}
@deffnx Syntax record-precedence-list* @var{record-name}
Return the list of record type descriptors which are parents of
@var{rtd}.  The first element of the list is @var{rtd} itself, followed
by its parent, then the parent of the parent and so on.  The syntax
takes a record name as argument.

@example
(define-record-type <alpha>)

(define-record-type <beta>
  (parent <alpha>))

(define-record-type <gamma>
  (parent <beta>))

(record-precedence-list (record-type-descriptor <alpha>))
@equiv{} (record-precedence-list* <alpha>)
@equiv{} (list (record-type-descriptor <alpha>))

(record-precedence-list (record-type-descriptor <beta>))
@equiv{} (record-precedence-list* <beta>)
@equiv{} (list (record-type-descriptor <beta>)
         (record-type-descriptor <alpha>))

(record-precedence-list (record-type-descriptor <gamma>))
@equiv{} (record-precedence-list* <gamma>)
@equiv{} (list (record-type-descriptor <gamma>)
         (record-type-descriptor <beta>)
         (record-type-descriptor <alpha>))
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node records makers
@section Automatically generated makers


@defun make-record-maker @var{rtd}
@defunx make-record-maker @var{rtd} @var{init-obj}
Build and return a thunk which, when evaluated, returns a new record of
type @var{rtd}.  All the fields are initialised to @var{init-obj}, which
defaults to @false{}.
@end defun


@deffn Macro make-record-maker* @var{record-name}
@deffnx Macro make-record-maker* @var{record-name} @var{init-obj}
Wrapper for @func{make-record-maker} which takes a record name as
argument rather than a record type descriptor.

@example
(make-record-maker* <alpha>)
@equiv{} (make-record-maker (record-type-descriptor <alpha>))
@end example
@end deffn


Example:

@example
(define-record-type <alpha>
  (fields (mutable a)
          (mutable b)
          (mutable c)))

(define-record-type <beta>
  (parent <alpha>)
  (fields (mutable d)
          (mutable e)
          (mutable f)))

(define-record-type <gamma>
  (parent <beta>)
  (fields (mutable g)
          (mutable h)
          (mutable i)))

(define maker
  (make-record-maker* <gamma> 1))

(define obj (maker))

(<gamma>? obj)
@result{} #t

(list (<alpha>-a obj) (<alpha>-b obj) (<alpha>-c obj)
      (<beta>-d  obj) (<beta>-e  obj) (<beta>-f  obj)
      (<gamma>-g obj) (<gamma>-h obj) (<gamma>-i obj))
@result{} (1 1 1  1 1 1  1 1 1)
@end example

@c page
@node records fields
@section Binding accessors and mutators


All the following macros accept as argument the record name of a record
type.  For the macros to behave correctly, the record type definitions
must be available at expand time; this means the definitions have to be
put into a separate library:

@example
(library (record-types)
  (export <alpha> <beta>)
  (import (rnrs))

  (define-record-type <alpha>
    (fields (mutable a)
            (mutable b)))

  (define-record-type <beta>
    (parent <alpha>)
    (fields (mutable c)
            (mutable d))))
@end example

@noindent
and loaded appropriately:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (records)
  (for (record-types) expand run))
@end example

@noindent
in the program or library making use of the macros.


@deffn Syntax define-record-accessors @var{record-name}
@deffnx Syntax define-record-accessors @var{record-name} @var{context-identifier}
Acquire the record type descriptor whose name is @var{record-name} and
bind its accessors to automatically generated names.  If the record
types hierarchy is:

@example
(define-record-type <alpha>
  (fields (mutable a)
          (mutable b)))

(define-record-type <beta>
  (parent <alpha>)
  (fields (mutable c)
          (mutable d)))
@end example

@noindent
the macro use:

@example
(define-record-accessors <beta>)
@end example

@noindent
defines:

@example
(define <beta>-a #<accessor of a in <alpha>>)
(define <beta>-b #<accessor of b in <alpha>>)
(define <beta>-c #<accessor of c in <beta>>)
(define <beta>-d #<accessor of d in <beta>>)
@end example

@noindent
the accessor names are formed by joining @var{record-name} and the field
name, using a single dash character as separator.

The optional @var{context-identifier} must be an identifier used to
represent the lexical context in which the accessors are bound; it
defaults to @var{record-name}.  It is useful to expand this macro in
another macro expansion.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-record-mutators @var{record-name}
@deffnx Syntax define-record-mutators @var{record-name} @var{context-identifier}
Acquire the record type descriptor whose name is @var{record-name} and
bind its mutators to automatically generated names.  If the record types
hierarchy is:

@example
(define-record-type <alpha>
  (fields (mutable a)
          (mutable b)))

(define-record-type <beta>
  (parent <alpha>)
  (fields (mutable c)
          (mutable d)))
@end example

@noindent
the macro use:

@example
(define-record-mutators <beta>)
@end example

@noindent
defines:

@example
(define <beta>-a-set! #<mutator of a in <alpha>>)
(define <beta>-b-set! #<mutator of b in <alpha>>)
(define <beta>-c-set! #<mutator of c in <beta>>)
(define <beta>-d-set! #<mutator of d in <beta>>)
@end example

@noindent
the mutator names are formed by joining @var{record-name}, the field
name and @samp{set!}, using a single dash character as separator; if a
field is immutable, no definition is generated.

The optional @var{context-identifier} must be an identifier used to
represent the lexical context in which the mutators are bound; it
defaults to @var{record-name}.  It is useful to expand this macro in
another macro expansion.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-record-accessors/this @var{record-name}
@deffnx Syntax define-record-mutators/this @var{record-name}
@deffnx Syntax define-record-accessors/this @var{record-name} @var{context-identifier}
@deffnx Syntax define-record-mutators/this @var{record-name} @var{context-identifier}
Like the above syntaxes, but bind only the accessors and mutators of the
record type itself, @strong{not} the ones of its parents.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-record-accessors/parents @var{record-name}
@deffnx Syntax define-record-mutators/parents @var{record-name}
@deffnx Syntax define-record-accessors/parents @var{record-name} @var{context-identifier}
@deffnx Syntax define-record-mutators/parents @var{record-name} @var{context-identifier}
Like the above syntaxes, but bind only the accessors and mutators of the
parents of the record type, @strong{not} the ones of the record itself.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-record-accessors/mutators @var{record-name}
@deffnx Syntax define-record-accessors/mutators @var{record-name} @var{context-identifier}
Acquire the record type descriptor whose name is @var{record-name} and
use its accessors and mutators in automatically generated definitions
for accessor/mutator functions.  If the record types hierarchy is:

@example
(define-record-type <alpha>
  (fields (mutable a)
          (mutable b)))

(define-record-type <beta>
  (parent <alpha>)
  (fields (mutable c)
          (immutable d)))
@end example

@noindent
the macro use:

@example
(define-record-accessors/mutators <beta>)
@end example

@noindent
defines:

@example
(define <beta>-a
  (case-lambda
    ((o)
     (#<accessor of a in <alpha>> o))
    ((o v)
     (#<mutator of a in <alpha>> o v))))

(define <beta>-b
  (case-lambda
    ((o)
     (#<accessor of b in <alpha>> o))
    ((o v)
     (#<mutator of b in <alpha>> o v))))

(define <beta>-c
  (case-lambda
    ((o)
     (#<accessor of c in <beta>> o))
    ((o v)
     (#<mutator of c in <beta>> o v))))

(define <beta>-d #<accessor of d in <beta>>)
@end example

@noindent
the accessor/mutator names are formed by joining @var{record-name} and
the field name, using a single dash character as separator; if a field
is immutable, only the accessor is generated.

The optional @var{context-identifier} must be an identifier used to
represent the lexical context in which the accessors are bound; it
defaults to @var{record-name}.  It is useful to expand this macro in
another macro expansion.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax with-record-accessors @var{record-name} (@var{field-name} ...) @var{form0} @var{form} ...
Acquire the record type descriptor whose name is @var{record-name} and
bind its accessors to automatically generated names; in the extent of
these bindings, evaluate the forms.  If the record types hierarchy is:

@example
(define-record-type <alpha>
  (fields (mutable a)
          (mutable b)))

(define-record-type <beta>
  (parent <alpha>)
  (fields (mutable c)
          (mutable d)))
@end example

@noindent
the macro use:

@example
(with-record-accessors <beta>
    (a b c d)
  (do-something))
@end example

@noindent
expands to:

@example
(let ((<beta>-a #<accessor of a in <alpha>>)
      (<beta>-b #<accessor of b in <alpha>>)
      (<beta>-c #<accessor of c in <beta>>)
      (<beta>-d #<accessor of d in <beta>>))
  (do-something))
@end example

@noindent
the accessor names are formed by joining @var{record-name} and the field
name, using a single dash character as separator.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax with-record-mutators @var{record-name} (@var{field-name} ...) @var{form0} @var{form} ...
Acquire the record type descriptor whose name is @var{record-name} and
bind its mutators to automatically generated names; in the extent of
these bindings, evaluate the forms.  If the record types hierarchy is:

@example
(define-record-type <alpha>
  (fields (mutable a)
          (mutable b)))

(define-record-type <beta>
  (parent <alpha>)
  (fields (mutable c)
          (immutable d)))
@end example

@noindent
the macro use:

@example
(with-record-mutators <beta>
    (a b c)
  (do-something))
@end example

@noindent
expands to:

@example
(let ((<beta>-a-set! #<mutator of a in <alpha>>)
      (<beta>-b-set! #<mutator of b in <alpha>>)
      (<beta>-c-set! #<mutator of c in <beta>>))
  (do-something))
@end example

@noindent
the mutator names are formed by joining @var{record-name}, the field
name and @samp{set!}, using a single dash character as separator.  It is
an assertion violation to attempt mutator access for an immutable field.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax with-record-accessors/mutators @var{record-name} (@var{field-name} ...) @var{form0} @var{form} ...
Acquire the record type descriptor whose name is @var{record-name} and
bind accessor/mutator procedures to automatically generated names; in
the extent of these bindings, evaluate the forms.  If the record types
hierarchy is:

@example
(define-record-type <alpha>
  (fields (mutable a)
          (mutable b)))

(define-record-type <beta>
  (parent <alpha>)
  (fields (mutable c)
          (immutable d)))
@end example

@noindent
the macro use:

@example
(with-record-accessors/mutators <beta>
    (a b c d)
  (do-something))
@end example

@noindent
expands to:

@example
(let ((<beta>-a (case-lambda
                  ((o)
                   (#<accessor of a in <alpha>> o))
                  ((o v)
                   (#<mutator of a in <alpha>> o v))))
      (<beta>-b (case-lambda
                  ((o)
                   (#<accessor of b in <alpha>> o))
                  ((o v)
                   (#<mutator of b in <alpha>> o v))))
      (<beta>-c (case-lambda
                  ((o)
                   (#<accessor of c in <beta>> o))
                  ((o v)
                   (#<mutator of c in <beta>> o v))))
      (<beta>-d #<accessor of d in <beta>>))
  (do-something))
@end example

@noindent
the accessor/mutator names are formed by joining @var{record-name} and
the field name, using a single dash character as separator; if a field
is immutable, a simple accessor is bound.
@end deffn

@c page
@node scmobj
@chapter A simple object system


The @library{scmobj} library defines an object system for Scheme that
provides: simple and multiple inheritance, generic functions,
multimethods.  It resembles @clos{} (the Common Lisp Object System), but
it does not implement a meta object protocol (@acronym{MOP}).

The library is a reorganisation and repackaging of ScmObj, an object
system for Scheme implemented by Dorai Sitaram.  The original code is
available from@footnote{@aurl{} last checked Thu Nov 13, 2008.}:

@center @url{http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/dorai/scmobj/scmobj.html}

This library has the main purpose of keeping the source code simple and
understandable, so that it can be taken as starting point for more
sophisticated object systems.

@menu
* scmobj overview::             Overview of the library.
* scmobj example::              Objects layout examples.
* scmobj class::                Classes.
* scmobj instance::             Instances.
* scmobj inspect::              Inspecting classes and instances.
* scmobj slot::                 Accessing slots.
* scmobj generic::              Generic functions and methods.
@end menu

@c page
@node scmobj overview
@section Overview of the library


@library{scmobj} objects, that is classes and instances, are association
lists: Proper lists of pairs whose cars are symbols and whose cdrs can
be any value.

In this document: each pair is called @dfn{slot}; the symbol is called
@dfn{slot name}; the value is called @dfn{slot value}.  By convention
the slot name symbols must have name starting with a colon @code{:}.

A @dfn{class} object is an alist whose first slot's name is
@code{:class}, and the other slot names are:

@example
:class-definition-name
:class-precedence-list
:slots
@end example

An instance object is an alist whose first slot's name is @code{:class},
and the other slot names are configured by the user.


@deffn Slot :class
It must be the first slot for both class and instance objects.

For an instance object: The value must be the class of the instance.

For a class object: The value must be the predefined @class{class}
object.  So a class object is a special case of instance object.
@end deffn


@deffn Slot :class-definition-name
A class object's slot whose value is the ``public name'' of the class.
By convention it must be a symbol whose name is enclosed in angular
parentheses.  It is useful to print debug messages.
@end deffn


@deffn Slot :class-precedence-list
A class object's slot whose value is a list representing the hierarchy
of superclasses for the instance objects of the class, or @false{} if
the class has no precedence list.  It is used for dispatching of
multimethods.

Notice that the value of this slot does @strong{not} hold the class
object itself.
@end deffn


@deffn Slot :slots
A class object's slot whose value is the list of slot names for the
instances of the class, or @false{} if instances have no slots.  For the
predefined @class{class} object, the list is:

@example
(:class-definition-name :class-precedence-list :slots)
@end example

Notice that the symbol @code{:class} is @strong{not} included.
@end deffn

@c page
@node scmobj example
@section Objects layout examples


In the following it is not always convenient to show the full layout; to
highlight informations of interest, it is better to omit the layout of
class objects nested into class objects.  When this is done the string
@code{#<apple>} is included in place of the layout of the class
@class{apple}.

Let's start with the layout of @class{class} itself:

@example
((:class . #<class>)
 (:class-definition-name . <class>)
 (:class-precedence-list . #f)
 (:slots . (:class-definition-name
            :class-precedence-list
            :slots)))
@end example

@noindent
we see that the class of @class{class} is @class{class} itself.

As an example of class hierarchy, let's define a class with no
superclass and no slots:

@example
(define-class <biologic>)
@end example

@noindent
its layout is this:

@example
((:class . #<class>)
 (:class-definition-name . <biologic>)
 (:class-precedence-list . #f)
 (:slots . #f))
@end example

@noindent
now we derive a class from it, still without slots:

@example
(define-class <fruit> (<biologic>))
@end example

@noindent
@class{fruit} is a @dfn{subclass} of @class{biologic}, @class{biologic}
is a @dfn{superclass} of @class{fruit}; the layout of the subclass is:

@example
((:class . #<class>)
 (:class-definition-name . <fruit>)
 (:class-precedence-list . (#<biologic>))
 (:slots . #f))
@end example

@noindent
finally we subclass again adding slots:

@example
(define-class <apple> (<fruit>)
  :variety :colour :quality)
@end example

@noindent
and the layout is:

@example
((:class . #<class>)
 (:class-definition-name . <apple>)
 (:class-precedence-list . (#<fruit> #<biologic>))
 (:slots . (:variety :colour :quality)))
@end example

We have a usable class, so we instantiate it:

@example
(define o (make <apple>
            :variety 'renetta
            :colour  'green
            :quality 'high))
@end example

@noindent
and the layout of the instance is:

@example
((:class   . #<apple>)
 (:variety . renetta)
 (:colour  . green)
 (:quality . high))
@end example

We may want to add a price:

@example
(define-class <price> () :tag)

(define-class <priced-apple> (<apple> <price>))
@end example

@noindent
and the layout of the class with multiple inheritance is:

@example
((:class . #<class>)
 (:class-definition-name . <priced-apple>)
 (:class-precedence-list . (#<apple>
                            #<fruit>
                            #<biologic>
                            #<price>))
 (:slots . (:variety :colour :quality :tag)))
@end example

The instance of a priced apple:

@example
(define p (make <priced-apple>
            :variety 'renetta
            :colour  'green
            :quality 'high
            :tag 100))
@end example

@noindent
has layout:

@example
((:class   . #<priced-apple>)
 (:variety . renetta)
 (:colour  . green)
 (:quality . high)
 (:tag     . 100))
@end example

@c page
@node scmobj class
@section Classes


@menu
* scmobj class make::           Making classes
* scmobj class chart::          A chart for predefined classes
* scmobj class core::           Core class types.
* scmobj class list::           List types.
* scmobj class compound::       Non-list compound data types.
* scmobj class numeric::        Numeric data types.
* scmobj class port::           Port types.
* scmobj class misc::           Miscellaneous types.
@end menu

@c page
@node scmobj class make
@subsection Making classes


@deffn Syntax make-class @var{list-of-superclasses} . @var{class-slots}
Build and return a new class value.

@var{list-of-superclasses} is the list of superclasses of the new
class; acceptable values are:

@itemize
@item
The empty list, in which case @class{class} is added by default.

@item
A list containing only the @class{class} value.

@item
A list of previously defined base classes.
@end itemize

@var{class-slots} must be a list of symbols representing the slot names.
By convention their names should start with a colon character, @code{:}.
It is possible for a class to add no new slots, that is
@var{class-slots} can be the empty string: This allows subclassing for
the only purpose of method dispatching.

Notice that classes instantiated with @func{make-class} will have no
class definition name.  The @func{class-definition-name} function
applied to them will return the symbol @code{:uninitialised}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-class @var{name} @var{list-of-superclasses} . @var{class-slots}
A wrapper for @func{make-class} that defines a new variable named
@var{name} and assigns the new class to it.  The class definition name
of the class is initialised to @var{name}.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Examples

Definition of a class with no superclasses and 3 slots named: @code{:a},
@code{:b} and @code{:c}:

@example
(define <one>
  (make-class () :a :b :c)
@end example

@noindent
the same with explicit selection of the base @class{class}:

@example
(define <one>
  (make-class (<class>) :a :b :c)
@end example

Simple inheritance:

@example
(let* ((<one>   (make-class ()      :a :b :c))
       (<two>   (make-class (<one>) :d :e :f))
       (<three> (make-class (<two>) :g :h :i)))
  ---)
@end example

@noindent
and multiple inheritance:

@example
(let* ((<one>   (make-class ()            :a :b :c))
       (<two>   (make-class (<one>)       :d :e :f))
       (<three> (make-class (<two> <one>) :g :h :i)))
  ---)
@end example

Defining classes using @func{define-class}:

@example
(define-class <one> ()
  :a :b :c)

(define-class <two> (<one>)
  :d :e :f)

(define-class <three> (<two>)
  :g :h :i)
@end example

@c page
@node scmobj class chart
@subsection A chart for predefined classes


@example
<class>
   |
   |                             -> <input-port>
   |                            |
   |                            +-> <output-port>
   |                            |
   |                            +-> <binary-port>
   |                            |
   |               --> <port> --+-> <textual-port>
   |              |
   |              +--> <record> --> <condition>
   |              |
   |              +--> <string>
   |              |
   |              +--> <char>
   v              |
<builtin-class> --+-------+-------+-----------+
   |              |       |       |           |
   v              v       v       v           v
<number>        <pair> <vector> <bytevector> <hashtable>
   |              |
   v              |
<complex>         +--------------+------------
   |              |              |            |
   v              v              v            v
<real-valued>   <list>    <dotted-list> <circular-list>
   |
   v
<real> ------> <flonum>
   |
   v
<rational-valued>
   |         |
   v         v
<rational> <integer-valued>
   |
   v
<integer>
   |
   v
<fixnum>
@end example

@c page
@node scmobj class core
@subsection Core class types


@deftp {Class} <class>
The base class of all the @library{scmobj} classes.
@end deftp


@deftp {Class} <builtin-class>
The base class built--in Scheme values.
@end deftp

@c page
@node scmobj class list
@subsection List types


@deftp Class <pair>
Class for values that satisfy @func{pair?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <list>
Class for values that satisfy @func{list?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <circular-list>
Class for values that satisfy @func{circular-list?}.  Notice that a pair
and a proper list are not circular lists.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <dotted-list>
Class for values that satisfy @func{dotted-list?}.  Notice that a pair
is always a dotted list, but a proper list is not a dotted list.
@end deftp

@c page
@node scmobj class compound
@subsection Non--list compound data types


@deftp Class <vector>
Class for values that satisfy @func{vector?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <bytevector>
Class for values that satisfy @func{bytevector?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <hashtable>
Class for values that satisfy @func{hashtable?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <record>
Class for values that satisfy @func{record?}.
@end deftp

@c page
@node scmobj class numeric
@subsection Numeric data types


@deftp Class <number>
Class for values that satisfy @func{number?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <complex>
Class for values that satisfy @func{complex?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <real-valued>
Class for values that satisfy @func{real-valued?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <real>
Class for values that satisfy @func{real?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <rational>
Class for values that satisfy @func{integer?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <rational-valued>
Class for values that satisfy @func{integer?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <integer-valued>
Class for values that satisfy @func{integer?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <integer>
Class for values that satisfy @func{integer?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <fixnum>
Class for values that satisfy @func{fixnum?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <flonum>
Class for values that satisfy @func{flonum?}.
@end deftp

@c page
@node scmobj class port
@subsection Port types


The following classes for input/output ports are predefined.


@deftp Class <port>
Class for values that satisfy @func{port?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <input-port>
Class for values that satisfy @func{input-port?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <output-port>
Class for values that satisfy @func{output-port?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <textual-port>
Class for values that satisfy @func{textual-port?}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <binary-port>
Class for values that satisfy @func{binary-port?}.
@end deftp


The binary/textual attributes are not mututally exclusive with the
input/output attributes, so if we need it, we can use multiple
inheritance:

@example
(define-class <binary-input-port> (<binary-port> <input-port>))
@end example

@c page
@node scmobj class misc
@subsection Miscellaneous types


@deftp {Class} <condition>
Class for values that satisfy @func{condition?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Class} <string>
Class for values that satisfy @func{string?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Class} <char>
Class for values that satisfy @func{char?}.
@end deftp

@c page
@node scmobj instance
@section Instances


@deffn Macro make @var{class-object} . @var{init-slots}
Build and return a new instance object of class @var{class-object}.  The
optional arguments are symbol/value couples used to initialise the
slots: The symbol must be the name of a slot, the value its value.

It is @strong{not} mandatory to initialise all the slots in a class
instance.  Uninitialised slots will be initialised to the symbol
@code{:uninitialised}.
@end deffn


@subsubheading Examples

Instantiate a class with 3 slots:

@example
(let* ((<one> (make-class () :a :b :c))
       (o     (make <one>
                 :a 1 :b 2 :c 3)))
  ---)
@end example

Instantiate a class with superclasses, initialising all the slots:

@example
(let* ((<one>   (make-class () :a :b :c))
       (<two>   (make-class (<one>) :d :e :f))
       (<three> (make-class (<two>) :g :h :i))
       (o       (make <three>
                   :a 1 :b 2 :c 3
                   :d 4 :e 5 :f 6
                   :g 7 :h 8 :i 9)))
  ---)
@end example

@c page
@node scmobj inspect
@section Inspecting classes and instances


@defun class? @var{obj}
Does its best to determine if @var{obj} is a valid class object.
@end defun


@defun instance? @var{obj}
Does its best to determine if @var{obj} is a valid instance object.
@end defun


@defun class-of @var{class/instance}
Return the class of the argument.  This function can be applied to both
class objects and instance objects.  If this function is not able to
determine a class, it returns @false{}; this should never happen,
though.
@end defun


@defun is-a? @var{class/instance} @var{class}
Return true if @var{class/instance} is an object of class @var{class}.
This function can be applied to both class objects and instance objects.
@end defun


@defun subclass? @var{class-1} @var{class-2}
Return true if @var{class-1} is a subclass of @var{class-2}, false
otherwise.
@end defun


@defun class-definition-name @var{class}
Return the class definition name for @var{class}.  Note that the
definition name is set only for classes instantiated with
@func{define-class}, for classes instantiated with @func{make-class} the
return value is the symbol @code{:uninitialised}.
@end defun


@defun class-precedence-list @var{class}
Return a list of classes representing the class precendence list, used
for method dispatching.  Note that @var{class} itself is @strong{not}
part of the class precedence list.
@end defun


@defun class-slots @var{class}
Return a list of symbols representing the slot names of @var{class}.
The symbol @code{:class} is excluded.
@end defun


@defun class-direct-slots @var{class}
Return a list of symbols representing the slot names of @var{class},
excluding the slots of its superclasses.
@end defun

@c page
@node scmobj slot
@section Accessing slots


@defun slot-ref @var{object} @var{slot-name}
Return the value of @var{slot-name} in @var{object}.  @var{slot-name}
must be a symbol.  It is an error if @var{object} has no slot named
@var{slot-name}.
@end defun


@defun {slot-set!} @var{object} @var{slot-name} @var{new-value}
Overwrite the value of @var{slot-name} in @var{object} with
@var{new-value}.  @var{slot-name} must be a symbol.  It is an error if
@var{object} has no slot named @var{slot-name}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Examples

Basic slot access:

@example
(let* ((<one>  (make-class () :a :b :c))
       (o      (make <one>
                 :a 1 :b 2 :c 3)))

  (slot-set! o ':b 123)

  (list (slot-ref o ':b)
        (slot-ref o ':a)
        (slot-ref o ':c))) @result{} '(123 1 3)
@end example

It is possible to define simple accessors for slots like this:

@example
(define-class <one> ()
  :alpha :beta)

(define alpha
  (case-lambda
    ((o)
     (slot-ref  o ':alpha))
    ((o v)
     (slot-set! o ':alpha v))))

(define o (make <one> :alpha 123))

(alpha o)       @result{} 123
(alpha o 456)
(alpha o)       @result{} 456
@end example

@noindent
or better:

@example
(define-class <one> ()
  :alpha :beta)

(define (make-accessor slot-name)
  (case-lambda
    ((o)
     (slot-ref  o slot-name))
    ((o v)
     (slot-set! o slot-name v))))

(define o (make <one> :alpha 123))
(define alpha
  (make-accessor ':alpha))

(alpha o)       @result{} 123
(alpha o 456)
(alpha o)       @result{} 456
@end example

@noindent
and closure accessors are also possible:

@example
(define-class <one> ()
  :alpha :beta)

(define (make-accessor o slot-name)
  (case-lambda
    (()
     (slot-ref  o slot-name))
    ((v)
     (slot-set! o slot-name v))))

(define o (make <one> :alpha 123))
(define alpha
  (make-accessor o ':alpha))

(alpha)         @result{} 123
(alpha 456)
(alpha)         @result{} 456
@end example

@c page
@node scmobj generic
@section Generic functions and methods


@dfn{Generic functions} are procedures that can be specialized to the
classes of their arguments.  Each specialisation of a generic function
is called @dfn{method}.  When applying a generic function to a set of
arguments, the most specific method with respect to the arguments'
classes is chosen.

@menu
* scmobj generic application::  How generic functions and methods
                                are invoked.
* scmobj generic dispatching::  How methods are dispatched.
* scmobj generic define::       Defining generic functions and methods.
* scmobj generic next::         Invoking the next method.
* scmobj generic examples::     Examples of method dispatching.
@end menu

@c page
@node scmobj generic application
@subsection How generic functions and methods are invoked


@library{scmobj} allows the definition of four kinds of methods:
@code{:primary}, @code{:around}, @code{:before} and @code{:after}.  The
short description is that @code{:around} methods are applied first, then
@code{:before}, @code{:primary} and @code{:after} methods are applied in
this order.

When a generic function is applied to a tuple of arguments, the
following happens:

@enumerate
@item
For each argument in the tuple a class is determined.  The tuple of
classes is called @dfn{signature}.
@end enumerate

For each kind of method, the generic function maintains an internal
collection in which every method's closure is associated to a signature.

@enumerate 2
@item
For each kind of method: The internal collection is queried for all the
methods applicable to the tuple of arguments, using the signature as
search key.

@item
For each kind of method: The list of applicable methods is sorted from
the more specific to the least specific for the signature.  The list of
@code{:after} methods is reversed.
@end enumerate

From now on the lists of sorted, applicable methods are handled as
stacks; the stacks of @code{:primary}, @code{:around} and @code{:before}
methods have most specific method on the top; the stack of @code{:after}
methods has the least specific method on the top.

From now on the application of the generic function enters an implicit
loop in which more methods' closures can be applied to the same tuple of
arguments.  The loop can terminate if a method's closure throws an
exception or, for @code{:around} and @code{:primary} methods, if it does
not take the special action of calling @func{call-next-method}.

The loop is a bit articulated, so we may have to read the following
descriptions multiple times.  We split the description in two branches:
First a simplified invocation for generic functions having at least one
applicable @code{:primary} method, no @code{:around} methods, and
performing no calls to @func{call-next-method}; then the full
application algorithm.

Here is the simplified branch with no @code{:around} methods and no
calls to @func{call-next-method}:

@enumerate 4
@item
Pop all the @code{:before} methods from the stack and apply their
closures to the tuple of arguments.  The return values of these
applications are discarded.

@item
Pop the next @code{:primary} method from the stack and apply its closure
to the tuple of arguments.  The return value of this application is
saved in a temporary location.

@item
Pop all the @code{:after} methods from the stack and apply their
closures to the tuple of arguments.  The return values of these
applications are discarded.

@item
Return the saved return value of the @code{:primary} method.
@end enumerate

Here is the full application algorithm:

@enumerate 4
@item
Test if this function application originated from a call to
@func{call-next-method} from a @code{:before} or @code{:after} method.
If it has: Raise an assertion violation.

@item
Test if this function application originated from a call to
@func{call-next-method} from a @code{:primary} method.  If it has:

@enumerate a
@item
If the stack of @code{:primary} methods is empty raise an assertion
violation.

@item
Pop the next @code{:primary} method from the stack and apply its closure
to the tuple of arguments.

@item
Break out returning the return value of this application: It becomes the
return value of @func{call-next-method}.
@end enumerate

@item
If the stack of @code{:primary} methods is empty: Raise an assertion
violation.  This condition means that the generic function has no
applicable methods for the tuple of arguments.

@item
If the stack of @code{:around} methods is not empty: Pop the next
@code{:around} method and apply its closure to the tuple of arguments.
Break out returning the return value of this application.

@item
Pop all the @code{:before} methods from the stack and apply their
closures to the tuple of arguments.  The return values of these
applications are discarded.

@item
Pop the next @code{:primary} method from the stack and apply its closure
to the tuple of arguments.  The return value of this application is
saved in a temporary location.

@item
Pop all the @code{:after} methods from the stack and apply their
closures to the tuple of arguments.  The return values of these
applications are discarded.

@item
Return the saved return value of the @code{:primary} method.
@end enumerate

The @code{:primary} methods are meant to do the real work of the
function.  Only the most specific is applied to the arguments, however
it can use @func{call-next-method} to invoke a least specialised version
and use its return value.

@code{:before} and @code{:after} methods are meant to execute additional
work before and after the primary methods.  While @code{:before} methods
are applied from the most specific to the least specific, @code{:after}
methods are applied from the least specific to the most specific.
Notice that the @code{:after} methods have no access to the return value
of the @code{:primary} methods.

@code{:around} methods are yet another level for performing tasks before
and after the primary methods; only the most specific is applied to the
arguments.  It is expected, but not mandatory, that an @code{:around}
method invokes @func{call-next-method}; such invocations will consume
all the applicable @code{:around} methods, from the least to the most
specific, and then will start the application of @code{:before},
@code{:primary} and @code{:after} methods.

@c page
@node scmobj generic dispatching
@subsection How methods are dispatched


Here we attempt the formulation of the rules by which methods are
dispatched.  A method is identified by a triplet of values: a list of
classes, called signature, representing the classes or expected
arguments; a boolean value telling if the closure accepts rest
arguments; the closure.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Applicability

First we need to understand when a method is applicable to a tuple of
arguments.  Given a tuple of arguments, a method supporting no rest
arguments is applicable to it if:

@enumerate
@item
The length of the signature is equal to the length of the arguments'
tuple.

@item
Position by position, the class in the signature is @func{eq?} to the
class of the value in the tuple, or it is in the class precedence list
of the class of the value in the tuple.
@end enumerate

@noindent
a method supporting rest arguments is applicable to it if:

@enumerate
@item
The length of the signature is less than or equal to the length of the
arguments' tuple.

@item
Position by position, up to the last element in the signature, the class
in the signature is @func{eq?} to the class of the value in the tuple,
or it is in the class precedence list of the class of the value in the
tuple.
@end enumerate

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Specificity

Now we can understand how to determine which one, among two applicable
methods, is more specific for a tuple of arguments.  Let's call the
methods @var{A} and @var{B}.  Notice that it is impossible for two
distinct methods, in the same generic function, to have the same
signature and the same support for rest arguments.

@enumerate
@item
If both @var{A} and @var{B} support rest arguments: The one with the
longest signature is more specific.

@item
The classes in the signatures are compared in couples, position by
position from the beginning to the end.

@enumerate a
@item
If the classes are @func{eq?}, the next couple is inspected.

@item
If the class from @var{A} is a subclass of the one from @var{B}: Then
@var{A} is more specific than @var{B}.  If no subclass relation exists
between the two, the next couple is inspected.

@item
For the current position, the class of the value in the tuple of
arguments is determined, its class precedence acquired.  The positions
of the classes from the signatures in the class precedence list is
computed: If the class from @var{A} comes first, then @var{A} is more
specific than @var{B}.
@end enumerate

@item
If the methods' signatures have the same length, and, position by
position, the classes of @var{A} are @func{eq?} to the classes of
@var{B}, but @var{A} supports rest arguments while @var{B} does not:
Then @var{B} is more specific than @var{A}.
@end enumerate

@c page
@node scmobj generic define
@subsection Defining generic functions and methods


The number of arguments (arity) of a generic function is undefined:
Every method can have a different number of arguments.


@deffn Macro define-generic @var{name}
Define a new generic function and bind it to @var{name}.
@end deffn


@defun make-generic-function
Build and return a new generic function.
@end defun


@deffn Macro declare-method @var{generic} (@var{arg-spec} ...) . @var{body}
@deffnx Macro declare-method (@var{generic} @var{arg-spec} ...) . @var{body}
@deffnx Macro declare-method @var{generic} :primary (@var{arg-spec} ...) . @var{body}
@deffnx Macro declare-method @var{generic} :before (@var{arg-spec} ...) . @var{body}
@deffnx Macro declare-method @var{generic} :after (@var{arg-spec} ...) . @var{body}
@deffnx Macro declare-method @var{generic} :around (@var{arg-spec} ...) . @var{body}
Add a new method to an already existent generic function, @var{generic}.
A declaration is @strong{not} a definition.  @ref{baselib definitions,
Definitions}

The qualifier specifies the kind of method; when the qualifier is not
present, it defaults to @code{:primary}.

The list of @var{arg-spec} specifies the classes of the values for which
the method specialises the function.  Notice that rest arguments are
supported and specified with the usual syntax.  A @var{arg-spec} can be:

@table @code
@item (@var{arg} @var{class})
Where @var{arg} is the formal name of the argument and @var{class} the
class of expected values.

@item @var{arg}
Where @var{arg} is the formal name of the argument.  In this case the
class defaults to @true{}, which is interpreted as superclass of every
other class.
@end table

If a method is defined with the same signature, and support for rest
arguments, of an already registered method: The old method is
overwritten by the new one.  Two methods having, position by position,
arguments of the same class, but such that one supports rest arguments
and the other does not, are different.
@end deffn


@deffn Macro add-method @var{generic} @var{signature} @var{has-rest} @var{closure}
@deffnx Macro add-method @var{generic} :primary @var{signature} @var{has-rest} @var{closure}
@deffnx Macro add-method @var{generic} :before @var{signature} @var{has-rest} @var{closure}
@deffnx Macro add-method @var{generic} :after @var{signature} @var{has-rest} @var{closure}
@deffnx Macro add-method @var{generic} :around @var{signature} @var{has-rest} @var{closure}
Add a new method to an already existent generic function, @var{generic}.
@var{signature} must be a list of classes for which the method
specialises the function.  @var{closure} must be the method's closure.
When the method qualifier is not present, it defaults to
@code{:primary}.  @var{has-rest} must be @true{} or @false{}, when
@true{} it means that the closure supports rest arguments.
@end deffn

@c page
@node scmobj generic next
@subsection Invoking the next method


@defun call-next-method
To be invoked from a @code{:primary} or @code{:around} method.  Call the
next most specific method.
@end defun


@defun next-method?
Return true if a next method is available.  Available next methods are
@code{:primary} and @code{:around} methods.  After the first
@code{:primary} method has been called, only @code{:primary} methods are
considered.

It can be invoked by any kind of method.
@end defun

@c page
@node scmobj generic examples
@subsection Examples of method dispatching.


Here we show with some examples what we have to expect from the
multimethod dispatching of @library{scmobj}.  In the following examples
the string @code{%apple} is written in place of the value bound to the
symbol @class{apple}.


@subsubheading Simple inheritance

Let's examine this example:

@example
(define-class <top> ())
(define-class <one> (<top>))
(define-class <two> (<one>))
(define-class <c>   (<two>))
@end example

@noindent
the class hierarchy is:

@example
<top> -> <one> -> <two> -> <c>
@end example

@noindent
and the full class precedence list for @class{c} is:

@example
(cons <c> (class-precedence-list <c>))
@result{} (%c %two %one %top)
@end example

@noindent
so for the generic function:

@example
(define-generic doit)
(declare-method doit ((o <one>)) 'one)
(declare-method doit ((o <two>)) 'two)
@end example

@noindent
applied to a value of class @class{c}: the method with @class{two} in
the signature is @emph{more specific} than the method with @class{one}
in the signature:

@example
(doit (make <c>)) @result{} two
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Multiple inheritance


Let's examine this example:

@example
(define-class <top> ())
(define-class <one> (<top>))
(define-class <two> (<top>))
(define-class <c> (<two> <one>))
@end example

@noindent
the class hierarchy is:

@example
<top> -+-> <one> -+-> <c>
       |          |
        -> <two> -
@end example

@noindent
and given the order in which the classes where handed to
@func{define-class}, the class precedence list for @class{c} is:

@example
(cons <c> (class-precedence-list <c>))
@result{} (%c %two %one %top)
@end example

@noindent
so for the generic function:

@example
(define-generic doit)
(declare-method doit ((o <one>)) 'one)
(declare-method doit ((o <two>)) 'two)
@end example

@noindent
applied to a value of class @class{c}: The method with @class{two} in
the signature is @emph{more specific} than the method with @class{one}
in the signature:

@example
(doit (make <c>)) @result{} two
@end example

Another multiple inheritance example:

@example
(define-class <top> ())
(define-class <one> (<top>))
(define-class <two> (<top>))
(define-class <three> (<two>))
(define-class <c> (<three> <one>))
@end example

@noindent
the class hierarchy is:

@example
<top> -+-------> <one> ------+-> <c>
       |                     |
        -> <two> -> <three> -
@end example

@noindent
and given the order in which the classes where handed to
@func{define-class}, the class precedence list for @class{c} is:

@example
(cons <c> (class-precedence-list <c>))
@result{} (%c %three %two %one %top)
@end example

@noindent
so for the generic function:

@example
(define-generic doit)
(declare-method doit ((o <one>)) 'one)
(declare-method doit ((o <two>)) 'two)
@end example

@noindent
applied to a value of class @class{c}: The method with @class{two} in
the signature is @emph{more specific} than the method with @class{one}
in the signature:

@example
(doit (make <c>)) @result{} two
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Other examples

Let's look at this:

@example
(define-class <top> ())
(define-class <c>   (<top>))
(define-class <one> (<c>))

(define-generic doit)
(declare-method doit ((o <one>)) 'one)

(doit (make <c>))
@end example

@noindent
this will result in a ``no method defined for these argument classes'
error because a value of class @class{c} is @strong{not} a value of
class @class{one}.  For a method to be applicable: the class from the
signature of the method has to be in in the class list of the argument,
not vice versa.  That is:

@example
(subclass? <c> <one>)
@end example

@noindent
must evaluate to true.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Kinds of methods

In the examples for the application of different kinds of methods, we
will make use of the following hierarchy of classes:

@example
(define-class <a> () :a)
(define-class <b> () :b)
(define-class <c> () :c)
(define-class <d> () :d)
(define-class <e> () :e)

(define-class <pp> (<a> <b>))
(define-class <qq> (<c> <d>))
(define-class <rr> (<pp> <e> <qq>))

(define pp (make <pp> :a 1 :b 2))
(define qq (make <qq> :c 3 :d 4))
(define rr (make <rr> :a 10 :b 20 :c 30 :d 40))
@end example

First some error case.  The following will raise an error because
@code{:before} methods are forbidden to @func{call-next-method}:

@example
(define-generic alpha)

(declare-method alpha ((o <a>))
  1)

(declare-method alpha :before ((o <a>))
  (call-next-method))

(alpha pp)
@end example

The following will raise an error because we @func{call-next-method}
when no next method is available:

@example
(define-generic alpha)

(declare-method alpha ((o <a>))
  (call-next-method))

(alpha pp)
@end example

The following will raise an error because we apply a generic function
when no @code{:primary} method has been defined:

@example
(define-generic alpha)

(declare-method alpha :around ((o <a>))
  (call-next-method))

(alpha pp)
@end example

Here is a full example showing the order of applications for all the
kinds of methods; it makes use of the @func{with-result} and
@func{add-result} forms from the @library{checks} library:

@example
(define-generic alpha)

(declare-method alpha :before ((o <rr>)) (add-result 1))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <pp>)) (add-result 2))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <a>))  (add-result 3))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <b>))  (add-result 4))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <e>))  (add-result 5))

(declare-method alpha :after  ((o <rr>)) (add-result 10))
(declare-method alpha :after  ((o <pp>)) (add-result 9))
(declare-method alpha :after  ((o <a>))  (add-result 8))
(declare-method alpha :after  ((o <b>))  (add-result 7))
(declare-method alpha :after  ((o <e>))  (add-result 6))

(declare-method alpha :around  ((o <rr>)) (cons 1 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around  ((o <pp>)) (cons 2 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around  ((o <a>))  (cons 3 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around  ((o <b>))  (cons 4 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around  ((o <e>))  (cons 5 (call-next-method)))

(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <rr>)) (cons 6 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <pp>)) (cons 7 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <a>))  (cons 8 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <b>))  (cons 9 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <e>))  10)

(with-result (alpha rr))
@result{} ((1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 . 10)
    (1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10))
@end example

@noindent
notice, in particular, how multiple inheritance is handled: Methods for
the @class{b} and @class{e} classes, coming as seconds in the class
inheritance lists, are applied after the methods of the @class{a} and
@class{pp} classes.

Now let's consider a the following class hierarchy with diamond
inheritance:

@example
(define-class <t> ()    :t)   ;  <t>---+
(define-class <x> (<t>) :x)   ;        v
(define-class <y> (<x>) :y)   ;   --- <x> ---
(define-class <w> (<x>) :w)   ;  |           |
(define-class <z> (<y> <w>))  ;  v           v
                              ; <y>         <w>
                              ;  |           |
                              ;   --> <z> <--

(define z (make <z> :t 0 :x 1 :y 2 :w 3))
@end example

@noindent
and let's define and apply all the kinds of methods:

@example
(define-generic alpha)

(declare-method alpha :around ((o <z>))  (cons 1 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around ((o <y>))  (cons 2 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around ((o <w>))  (cons 3 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around ((o <x>))  (cons 4 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around ((o <t>))  (cons 5 (call-next-method)))

(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <z>)) (cons 6 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <y>)) (cons 7 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <w>)) (cons 8 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <x>)) (cons 9 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <t>)) 10)

(declare-method alpha :before ((o <z>))  (add-result 1))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <y>))  (add-result 2))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <w>))  (add-result 3))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <x>))  (add-result 4))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <t>))  (add-result 5))

(declare-method alpha :after ((o <z>))   (add-result 10))
(declare-method alpha :after ((o <y>))   (add-result 9))
(declare-method alpha :after ((o <w>))   (add-result 8))
(declare-method alpha :after ((o <x>))   (add-result 7))
(declare-method alpha :after ((o <t>))   (add-result 6))

(with-result (alpha z))
@result{} ((1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 . 10)
    (1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10))
@end example

Here is yet another example with diamond inheritance:

@example
(define-class <0> () :0)        ;    <0>--+
(define-class <1> (<0>) :1)     ;         v
(define-class <2> (<1>) :2)     ;   ---- <1> ----
(define-class <3> (<1>) :3)     ;  |             |
(define-class <4> (<3>) :4)     ;  v             |
(define-class <5> (<4> <2>))    ; <3>            |
                                ;  |             |
                                ;  v             v
                                ; <4>           <2>
                                ;  |             |
                                ;   ---> <5> <---

(define n (make <5> :0 0 :1 1 :2 2 :3 3 :4 4))
@end example

@noindent
and let's define and apply all the kinds of methods:

@example
(define-generic alpha)

(declare-method alpha :around ((o <5>))  (cons 1 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around ((o <4>))  (cons 2 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around ((o <3>))  (cons 3 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around ((o <2>))  (cons 4 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around ((o <1>))  (cons 5 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :around ((o <0>))  (cons 6 (call-next-method)))

(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <5>)) (cons 7 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <4>)) (cons 8 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <3>)) (cons 9 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <2>)) (cons 10 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <1>)) (cons 11 (call-next-method)))
(declare-method alpha :primary ((o <0>)) 12)

(declare-method alpha :before ((o <5>))  (add-result 1))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <4>))  (add-result 2))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <3>))  (add-result 3))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <2>))  (add-result 4))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <1>))  (add-result 5))
(declare-method alpha :before ((o <0>))  (add-result 6))

(declare-method alpha :after ((o <5>))   (add-result 12))
(declare-method alpha :after ((o <4>))   (add-result 11))
(declare-method alpha :after ((o <3>))   (add-result 10))
(declare-method alpha :after ((o <2>))   (add-result 9))
(declare-method alpha :after ((o <1>))   (add-result 8))
(declare-method alpha :after ((o <0>))   (add-result 7))

(with-result (alpha n))
@result{} ((1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 . 12)
    (1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12)))
@end example

We can conclude that, when it comes to method application:

@itemize
@item
If diamond inheritance is not present: The graph of inheritance is a
tree, which is flattened to a list representing the visit of a preorder
iterator.

@item
When diamond inheritance is present: Diamond groups are flattened to a
list with classes in the middle at the center:

@example
  -- <x> --
 |         |
 v         v
<y>       <w>       @result{}   (<z> <y> <w> <x>)
 |         |
  -> <z> <-

  ---- <1> ----
 |             |
 v             |
<3>            |
 |             |    @result{}  (<5> <4> <3> <2> <1>)
 v             v
<4>           <2>
 |             |
  ---> <5> <---
@end example

@noindent
then the graph is flattened and visited in preorder.
@end itemize

@c page
@node nos
@chapter Nausicaa Object System


The @library{nos} library is a basic object system that barely wraps
@rnrs{6} records; it is especially useful in conjunction with the
@library{records} library.  It has two components: a protocol for the
definition of record types; a generic functions infrastructure providing
method dispatching.

@menu
* nos builtin::                 Record type descriptors for builtins.
* nos records::                 Handling record types.
* nos methods::                 Multimethod dispatching.
@end menu

@c page
@node nos builtin
@section Record type descriptors for builtin values


A record is described by its record type descriptor (@acronym{RTD});
when dispatching multimethods, it is convenient to use the record type
descriptor to represent the ``class'' of a record.

Builtin Scheme values have no @acronym{RTD}, so @library{nos} assigns a
conventional one to them.  The only purpose of a conventional
@acronym{RTD} is to be used in multimethod dispatching.

@menu
* nos builtin chart::           A chart for predefined @acronym{rtd}s.
* nos builtin rtd::             Conventional @acronym{rtd}s.
@end menu

@c page
@node nos builtin chart
@subsection A chart for predefined classes


@example
                                 -> <input-port>
                                |
                                +-> <output-port>
                                |
                                +-> <binary-port>
                                |
                   --> <port> --+-> <textual-port>
                  |
                  +--> <record> --> <condition>
                  |
                  +--> <string>
                  |
                  +--> <char>
                  |
<builtin>---------+-------+---------+-----------+
   |              |       |         |           |
   v              v       v         v           v
<number>        <pair> <vector> <bytevector> <hashtable>
   |              |
   v              v
<complex>       <list>
   |
   v
<real-valued>
   |
   v
<real> ------> <flonum>
   |
   v
<rational-valued>
   |         |
   v         v
<rational> <integer-valued>
   |
   v
<integer>
   |
   v
<fixnum>
@end example

@c page
@node nos builtin rtd
@subsection Conventional @acronym{rtd}


The @library{nos} library exports the following record type names, which
can be used to access the conventional record type descriptors through
@func{record-type-descriptor}.  @ref{stdlib records syntactic layer,
Syntactic Layer}


@deftp {Record Type Name} <top>
Conventional parent of all the record types.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <builtin>
The parent of all the conventional @acronym{RTD}s, with the exception of
@class{top}.
@end deftp

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading List types


@deftp {Record Type Name} <pair>
Type for values satisfying @func{pair?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <list>
Type for values satisfying @func{list?}.
@end deftp

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Non--list compound data types


@deftp {Record Type Name} <vector>
Type for values satisfying @func{vector?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <bytevector>
Type for values satisfying @func{bytevector?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <hashtable>
Type for values satisfying @func{hashtable?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <record>
Type for values satisfying @func{record?}.
@end deftp

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Numeric data types


@deftp {Record Type Name} <number>
Type for values satisfying @func{number?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <complex>
Type for values satisfying @func{complex?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <real-valued>
Type for values satisfying @func{real-valued?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <real>
Type for values satisfying @func{real?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <rational>
Type for values satisfying @func{integer?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <rational-valued>
Type for values satisfying @func{integer?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <integer-valued>
Type for values satisfying @func{integer?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <integer>
Type for values satisfying @func{integer?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <fixnum>
Type for values satisfying @func{fixnum?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <flonum>
Type for values satisfying @func{flonum?}.
@end deftp

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Port types

The binary/textual attributes are not mututally exclusive with the
input/output attributes.


@deftp {Record Type Name} <port>
Type for values satisfying @func{port?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <input-port>
Type for values satisfying @func{input-port?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <output-port>
Type for values satisfying @func{output-port?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <textual-port>
Type for values satisfying @func{textual-port?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <binary-port>
Type for values satisfying @func{binary-port?}.
@end deftp

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Miscellaneous types


@deftp {Record Type Name} <condition>
Type for values satisfying @func{condition?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <string>
Type for values satisfying @func{string?}.
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type Name} <char>
Type for values satisfying @func{char?}.
@end deftp

@c page
@node nos records
@section Handling record types


@defun record-type-of @var{obj}
Return the record type descriptor associated to @var{obj}.  If @var{obj}
is a record, its proper record type descriptor is returned; if @var{obj}
is a builtin Scheme value, a conventional record type descriptor is
returned.  @ref{nos builtin, Record type descriptors for builtin values}
@end defun


@defun record-is-a? @var{obj} @var{rtd}
Return true if @var{obj} is a value of type @var{rtd}.  @var{obj} can be
a record or a builtin Scheme type.  This function makes use of
@func{record-type-of}.
@end defun


@defun record-subtype? @vari{rtd} @varii{rtd}
Return true if @vari{rtd} is @func{eq?} to @varii{rtd} or it is in the
list of parents of @varii{rtd}.
@end defun

@c page
@node nos methods
@section Multimethod dispatching


@dfn{Generic functions} are procedures that can be specialised to the
(conventional) record types of their arguments.  Each specialisation of
a generic function is called @dfn{method}.  When applying a generic
function to a set of arguments, the most specific method with respect to
the arguments' types is chosen.

@menu
* nos methods application::     How generic functions and methods
                                are invoked.
* nos methods dispatching::     How methods are dispatched.
* nos methods define::          Defining generic functions and methods.
* nos methods next::            Invoking the next method.
* nos methods examples::        Examples of method dispatching.
* nos methods predefined::      Predefined generic functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node nos methods application
@subsection How generic functions and methods are invoked


In contrast with @library{scmobj}, @library{nos} only allows the
definition of primary methods.  When a generic function is applied to a
tuple of arguments, the following happens:

@enumerate
@item
For each argument in the tuple a record type is determined.  The tuple
of types is called @dfn{signature}.  Each generic function maintains an
internal collection in which every method's closure is associated to a
signature.

@item
The internal collection of methods is queried for all the methods
applicable to the tuple of arguments, using the signature as search key.

@item
The list of applicable methods is sorted from the more specific to the
least specific for the signature.  From now on the list of sorted,
applicable methods is handled as a stack.

@item
Pop the next method from the stack and apply its closure to the tuple of
arguments.  The return value of this application becomes the return
value of the generic function application.  If the function calls the
next method, recurse to step 4.
@end enumerate

@c page
@node nos methods dispatching
@subsection How methods are dispatched


Here we attempt the formulation of the rules of method dispatching.  A
method is identified by a triplet of values: a list of @acronym{RTD}s,
called signature, representing the classes or expected arguments; a
boolean value telling if the closure accepts rest arguments; the
closure.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Applicability

First we need to understand when a method is applicable to a tuple of
arguments.  Given a tuple of arguments, a method supporting no rest
arguments is applicable to it if:

@enumerate
@item
The length of the signature is equal to the length of the arguments'
tuple.

@item
Position by position, the @acronym{RTD} in the signature is @func{eq?}
to the @acronym{RTD} of the argument or it is one of its parents.
@end enumerate

@noindent
a method supporting rest arguments is applicable to it if:

@enumerate
@item
The length of the signature is less than or equal to the length of the
arguments' tuple.

@item
Position by position, up to the last element in the signature, the
@acronym{RTD} in the signature is @func{eq?} to the @acronym{RTD} of the
argument or it is one of its parents.
@end enumerate

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Specificity

Now we can understand how to determine which one, among two applicable
methods, is more specific for a tuple of arguments.  Let's call the
methods @var{A} and @var{B}.

Notice that it is impossible for two distinct methods, in the same
generic function, to have the same signature and the same support for
rest arguments.

Also, records support only single inheritance, so if two methods are
applicable the homologous @acronym{RTD}s in their signatures are
@func{eq?} or subtypes.

@enumerate
@item
If both @var{A} and @var{B} support rest arguments: The one with the
longest signature is more specific.

@item
The @acronym{RTD}s in the signatures are compared in couples, position
by position from the beginning to the end.

@enumerate a
@item
If the @acronym{RTD}s are @func{eq?}, the next couple is inspected.

@item
If the @acronym{RTD} from @var{A} is a subtype of the one from @var{B}:
@var{A} is more specific than @var{B}.
@end enumerate

@item
If the methods' signatures have the same length, and, position by
position, the @acronym{RTD}s of @var{A} are @func{eq?} to the
@acronym{RTD}s of @var{B}, but @var{A} supports rest arguments while
@var{B} does not: Then @var{B} is more specific than @var{A}.
@end enumerate

@c page
@node nos methods define
@subsection Defining generic functions and methods


The number of arguments (arity) of a generic function is undefined:
Every method can have a different number of arguments.


@deffn Syntax define-generic @var{name}
Define a new generic function and bind it to @var{name}.
@end deffn


@defun make-generic-function
Build and return a new generic function.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax define-generic/merge @var{name} @var{generic0} @var{generic} ...
Define a new generic function and bind it to @var{name}.  The internal
collection of methods holds the union of the method collections from the
@var{generic} arguments, which must be generic functions.

The union is performed visiting arguments from left to right; when two
methods have the same signature and the same support for rest arguments,
the one from the leftmost generic function has precedence.

Merging methods is useful when two different libraries export generic
functions bound to the same identifier.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax declare-method @var{generic} (@var{arg-spec} ...) . @var{body}
@deffnx Syntax declare-method (@var{generic} @var{arg-spec} ...) . @var{body}
Add a new method to an already existent generic function, @var{generic};
a declaration is @strong{not} a definition.  @ref{baselib definitions,
Definitions}

The list of @var{arg-spec} specifies the @acronym{RTD}s of the arguments
for which this method specialises the generic function.  Notice that
rest arguments are supported and specified with the usual syntax.  An
@var{arg-spec} can be:

@table @code
@item (@var{arg} @var{record-name})
Where @var{arg} is the formal name of the argument and @var{record-name}
the (conventional) record name of expected values.

@item @var{arg}
Where @var{arg} is the formal name of the argument.  In this case the
@acronym{RTD} defaults to the conventional @class{top}, which is
interpreted as parent of every other @acronym{RTD} (and so it has the
least specificity).
@end table

If a method is defined with the same signature, and support for rest
arguments, of an already registered method: The old method is
overwritten by the new one.  Two methods having, position by position,
arguments of the same @acronym{RTD}, but such that one supports rest
arguments and the other does not, are different.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax add-method @var{generic} @var{signature} @var{has-rest} @var{closure}
Add a new method to an already existent generic function, @var{generic}.
@var{signature} must be a list of record names for which this method
specialises the generic function.  @var{closure} must be the method's
closure.  @var{has-rest} must be @true{} or @false{}, when @true{} it
means that the closure supports rest arguments.
@end deffn

@c page
@node nos methods next
@subsection Invoking the next method


@defun call-next-method
Call the next most specific method.
@end defun


@defun next-method?
Return true if a next method is available.
@end defun

@c page
@node nos methods examples
@subsection Examples of method dispatching.


Here we show with some examples what we have to expect from the
multimethod dispatching of @library{nos}.  In the following examples the
string @code{%apple} is written in place of the value bound to the
symbol @class{apple}.

Let's examine this example:

@example
(define-record-type <one> (parent <top>))
(define-record-type <two> (parent <one>))
(define-record-type <c>   (parent <two>))
@end example

@noindent
the record hierarchy is:

@example
<top> -> <one> -> <two> -> <c>
@end example

@noindent
and the full record precedence list for @class{c} is:

@example
(record-precedence-list* <c>)
@result{} (%c %two %one %top)
@end example

@noindent
so for the generic function:

@example
(define-generic doit)
(declare-method (doit (o <one>)) 'one)
(declare-method (doit (o <two>)) 'two)
@end example

@noindent
applied to a value of type @class{c}: the method with @class{two} in the
signature is @emph{more specific} than the method with @class{one} in
the signature:

@example
(doit (make-<c>)) @result{} two
@end example

@noindent
also the method with @class{one} in the signature is the ``next method''
of the method with @class{two} in the signature, we can call it using
@func{call-next-method}.

The following example shows a call to the next method:

@example
(define-generic fluff)

(declare-method (fluff (o <one>))
  'one)

(declare-method (fluff (o <two>))
  (cons 'two (call-next-method)))

(define o (make-<c>))

(fluff o)
@result{} (two . one)
@end example

@c page
@node nos methods predefined
@subsection Predefined generic functions


@deffn {Generic Function} object->string @var{obj}
Return a string representation for @var{obj}.  A non--specialised method
is predefined to use the following algorithm:

@example

@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node sexps
@chapter Handling symbolic expressions


The @library{sexps} and @library{sexps syntax} libraries implement
matching procedures and macros for symbolic expressions (S--expressions
or @dfn{sexp}).

@menu
* sexps match::                 Plain matching.
* sexps operators::             Matching operators.
* sexps transform::             Transforming S--expressions.
* sexps macro::                 Macro transformers.
@end menu

@c page
@node sexps match
@section Plain matching


Let's start with some example of sexp matching:

@example
(let ((pattern '(a 1 #t))
      (form    '(a 1 #t))
  (sexp-match pattern form))
@result{} ()

(sexp-match '(a b) '(a c))
@error{} mismatch between B and C

(sexp-match `(a ,(sexp-pred integer?))
            '(a 1))
@result{} ()

(sexp-match `(a ,(sexp-pred integer?))
            '(a b))
@error{} mismatch between INTEGER? and B
@end example

@noindent
the @library{sexps} library defines several @dfn{matching operators},
and custom ones can be easily coded.  @ref{sexps operators, Matching
operators}


@defun sexp-match @var{pattern} @var{form}
Recursively match elements in the sexp template @var{pattern} with
elements in the sexp @var{form}.  Return an alist whose entries
represent the bindings between variables from @var{pattern} and values
from @var{form}, or null if no bindings where defined.

If a mismatch between @var{pattern} and @var{form} is detected, an error
is raised with condition of type @samp{&sexp-mismatch}.

@var{pattern} must be a sexp template with the following constraints and
semantics meaning:

@itemize
@item
@var{pattern} must be null or a proper list.  If it is null, it can
match only a null @var{form}.

@item
If an element of @var{pattern} is a pair, it must be the first pair in a
proper list; the list is interpreted as a nested sexp pattern.

@item
If an element of @var{pattern} is a procedure, it must be a matching
operator.  @ref{sexps operators, Matching operators}

@item
Every other element is compared to the elements of @var{form} using
@func{equal?}.
@end itemize

@var{form} must be a sexp whose elements have the following constraints
and semantics meaning:

@itemize
@item
@var{form} must be null or a proper list.  If it is null, it can be
matched both by a null @var{pattern} and by a @var{pattern} holding an
appropriate matching operator.

@item
If an element of @var{form} is a pair, it is @strong{not} mandatory for
it to be the first pair in a proper list.  A proper list in @var{form}
can be matched by a proper list in @var{pattern}.  In general, whether a
pair in @var{form} will be matched or not depends on the operators in
@var{pattern}.

@item
Every other element is compared to the elements of @var{form} using
@func{eqv?}.  Notice that the behaviour of @func{eqv?} with respect to
procedures is undefined in @rnrs{6}; it appears there is no safe way to
match a procedure in @var{form}.
@end itemize
@end defun


@deffn Syntax sexp-mismatch-error @var{who} @var{pattern} @var{form}
Raise a non--continuable exception with conditions of type
@samp{&sexp-mismatch}, @samp{&message}, @samp{&who}.  All the arguments
are evaluated only once.
@end deffn


@deftp {Condition Type} &sexp-mismatch
Type of condition used to signal a sexp mismatch.  It is derived from
@samp{&mismatch}.
@end deftp


@defun make-sexp-mismatch @var{pattern-token} @var{form-token}
Return a new condition object of type @samp{&sexp-mismatch}.
@var{pattern-token} must be a value representing the portion of sexp
pattern which failed to match.  @var{form-token} must be a value
representing the portion of sexp form which failed to match.
@end defun

@defun sexp-mismatch? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a condition object of type
@samp{&sexp-mismatch}.
@end defun


@defun sexp-mismatch-pattern @var{obj}
@defunx sexp-mismatch-form @var{obj}
Accessors for the fields of a @samp{&sexp-mismatch} condition object.
@end defun

@c page
@node sexps operators
@section Matching operators


A @dfn{matching operator} is a function (usually a closure) which is
applied to a sexp form with the purpose of matching zero, one or more
elements in it.

@itemize
@item
If successful, it must return two values: the alist of bindings defined
by the matching (see variables matching below), which can be null; the
tail of the form still to match.

@item
If a mismatch is detected, it must raise a @samp{&sexp-mismatch}
condition.
@end itemize

An operator which matches nothing and returns the whole form looks like
this:

@example
(define (match-nothing form)
  (values '() form))
@end example

@noindent
and it can be used as follows:

@example
(sexp-match `(a b ,match-nothing) '(a b))
@result{} ()

(sexp-match `(,match-nothing) '())
@result{} ()
@end example

An operator which matches the symbol @samp{alpha} looks like this:

@example
(define (alpha-op form)
  (cond ((null? form)
         (sexp-mismatch-error #f 'alpha form))
        ((eq? 'alpha (car form))
         (values '() (cdr form)))
        (else
         (sexp-mismatch-error #f 'alpha form))))
@end example

@noindent
it can be parametrised with a symbol argument like:

@example
(define (sexp-symbol symbol)
  (lambda (form)
    (cond ((null? form)
           (sexp-mismatch-error #f symbol form))
          ((eq? symbol (car form))
           (values '() (cdr form)))
          (else
           (sexp-mismatch-error #f symbol form)))))
@end example

@noindent
and it can be used as follows:

@example
(sexp-match `(a b ,(sexp-symbol 'alpha))
            '(a b alpha))
@result{} ()

(sexp-match `(,(sexp-symbol 'alpha) ,(sexp-symbol 'beta))
            '(alpha beta))
@result{} ()
@end example

@noindent
in the last example, the first operator's closure is invoked with:

@example
form @equiv{} (alpha beta)
@end example

@noindent
and the second operator's closure is invoked with:

@example
form @equiv{} (beta)
@end example

An operator can consume any number of tokens from its form argument.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Variable matching

To extract a value from a sexp form we use @dfn{variables matching}
operators.  It works like this:

@example
(define ?alpha (make-sexp-variable '?alpha 1))
(define ?beta  (make-sexp-variable '?beta  2))

(sexp-match `(,(sexp-var ?alpha) ,(sexp-var ?beta))
            '(91 92))
@result{} ((#<record sexp-variable ?alpha> . 91)
    (#<record sexp-variable ?beta>  . 92))
@end example

@noindent
the resulting alist of bindings can be inspected with @func{assq} using
the @samp{sexp-variable} records as keys.  A variable matching operator
matches any value but null.


@defun sexp-var @var{variable}
Used to extract a value from a form, return a matching operator.
@var{variable} must be a record of type @samp{sexp-variable}.
@end defun


@deftp {Record Type} sexp-variable
Record type used to assign a name to values from sexp forms.  It has the
following, immutable, fields

@table @samp
@item name
The public name of the variable, to be used for debugging purposes.

@item default
A default value for the variable in case the sexp form does no bind it.
When using a transformer the sentinel value has a special meaning.
@pxref{sentinel, The sentinel value}
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-sexp-variable @var{name} @var{default}
Build and return a new @samp{sexp-variable} record.
@end defun


@defun sexp-variable? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a record of type @samp{sexp-variable}.
@end defun


@defun sexp-variable-name @var{obj}
@defunx sexp-variable-default @var{obj}
Accessors for the fields of a @samp{sexp-variable} record.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax let-sexp-variables ((@var{var} @var{default}) ...) @var{form0} @var{form} ...
Similar to @func{let}, build a set of @samp{sexp-variable} records and
bind them to @var{var} identifiers.  The forms are evaluated in the
current environment extended with the variables bindings.

The example above can be rewritten:

@example
(let-sexp-variables ((?alpha 1)
                     (?beta  2))
  (sexp-match `(,(sexp-var ?alpha) ,(sexp-var ?beta))
              '(91 92)))
@result{} ((#<record sexp-variable ?alpha> . 91)
    (#<record sexp-variable ?beta>  . 92))
@end example
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Predicate matching

A @dfn{predicate matching} operator can be used to match any value from
a sexp form.

@example
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-pred integer?)) '(123))
@result{} ()

(sexp-match `(,(sexp-pred null?)) '())
@result{} ()

(sexp-match `(((,(sexp-pred positive?)))) '(((123))))
@result{} ()
@end example

@noindent
a predicate matching operator matches any value for which the predicate
returns true.

@defun sexp-pred @var{pred}
Used to match a value using a Scheme predicate procedure.  @var{pred}
must be a procedure returning true or @false{}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Logic matching


@deffn Function sexp-or @var{pattern-token} ...
@deffnx Syntax sexp-or* @var{pattern-token} ...
Return an operator which attempts to match the car of the form with each
@var{pattern-token}, halting at the first positive match.  The match of
the operator is positive if at least one of the alternatives does match.

@func{sexp-or*} behaves like @func{sexp-or}, but quotes each of its
arguments.

@example
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-or 'a 'b 'c)) '(a)) @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-or 'a 'b 'c)) '(b)) @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-or 'a 'b 'c)) '(c)) @result{} '()

(sexp-match `(,(sexp-or* a b c)) '(a)) @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-or* a b c)) '(b)) @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-or* a b c)) '(c)) @result{} '()
@end example

Notice that the arguments of @func{sexp-or} must be pattern tokens, not
pattern sexps:

@example
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-or* (a) (b) (c))) '((a))) @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-or* (a) (b) (c))) '((b))) @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-or* (a) (b) (c))) '((c))) @result{} '()
@end example

If @func{sexp-or} invoked with no arguments, it returns an operator
which matches nothing and always raises a sexp mismatch error; this is
consistent with @code{(or)} returning @false{} in @rnrs{6}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function sexp-and @var{pattern-token} ...
@deffnx Syntax sexp-and* @var{pattern-token} ...
Return an operator which attempts to match the car of the form with each
@var{pattern-token}, halting at the first mismatch.  The match of the
operator is positive if all the alternatives do match.

@func{sexp-and*} behaves like @func{sexp-and}, but quotes each of its
arguments.

@example
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-and* a)) '(a))      @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-and) b)  '(a b))    @result{} '())

(let-sexp-variables ((?v 0))
  (sexp-match `(,(sexp-and (sexp-pred integer?)
                           (sexp-var ?v)))
              '(123)))
@result{} ((#<record sexp-variable ?v> . 123))
@end example

If @func{sexp-and} invoked with no arguments, it returns an operator
which always matches a single token; this is consistent with
@code{(and)} returning @true{} in @rnrs{6}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function sexp-any @var{pattern-token}
@deffnx Syntax sexp-any* @var{pattern-token}
Return an operator which attempts to match every sexp in the form with
@var{pattern-token}, halting at the first mismatch.  It is fine if
@var{pattern-token} does not match the car of the form.

@func{sexp-any*} behaves like @func{sexp-any}, but quotes its argument.

@example
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-any* a)) '())      @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-any* a)) '(a))     @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-any* a)) '(a a))   @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-any* a)) '(a a a)) @result{} '()

(sexp-match `(,(sexp-any* a) b) '(b))           @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-any* a) b) '(a b))         @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-any* a) b) '(a a b))       @result{} '()
(sexp-match `(,(sexp-any* a) b) '(a a a b))     @result{} '()
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Function sexp-one @var{pattern-token}
@deffnx Syntax sexp-one* @var{pattern-token}
Like @func{sexp-any}, but @var{pattern-token} must match at least the
car of the form.
@end deffn

@c page
@node sexps transform
@section Transforming S--expressions


A sexp transformer is used to match a sexp with a pattern, extracting
variable values from it.  The position of the ``variables'' in the sexp
form is marked by records of type @samp{sexp-variable}.

Here is an example:

@example
(define trans
  (let-sexp-variables ((?a sentinel)
                       (?b sentinel))
    (make-sexp-transformer `(doit (alpha ,(sexp-var ?a))
                                  (beta  ,(sexp-var ?b)))
                           `(doit ,?a ,?b))))

(trans '(doit (alpha 1) (beta 2)))
@result{} (doit 1 2)
@end example

@noindent
and here is an example making use of the default values for unbound
variables:

@example
(define trans
  (let-sexp-variables ((?a 10)
                       (?b 20))
    (make-sexp-transformer
      `(doit ,(sexp-any (sexp-or `(alpha ,(sexp-var ?a))
                                 `(beta  ,(sexp-var ?b)))))
      `(doit ,?a ,?b))))

(trans '(doit (alpha 1) (beta 2)))
@result{} (doit 1 2)

(trans '(doit (alpha 1)))
@result{} (doit 1 20)

(trans '(doit (beta 2)))
@result{} (doit 10 2)

(trans '(doit))
@result{} (doit 10 20)
@end example


@defun make-sexp-transformer @var{pattern} @var{output}
Return a function that takes a sexp, matches it to the @var{pattern}
sexp, extracts bindings for the variables, and returns a copy of the
sexp @var{output} with the variables substituted by their values.

If a variable referenced by @var{output} is left undefined by the
bindings:

@itemize
@item
If the variable has default value set to the sentinel, an error is
raised.

@item
If the variable has default value different from the sentinel, the
default value is substituted.
@end itemize

See @func{sexp-match} for the syntax of @var{pattern}.
@end defun


@defun sexp-substitute-bindings @var{output} @var{bindings-alist}
Build and return a copy of the sexp @var{output} in which the
occurrences of the keywords in @var{bindings-alist} are substituted with
their values.  The keywords are meant to be records of type
@samp{sexp-variable}.
@end defun

@c page
@node sexps macro
@section Macro transformers


The following bindings are exported by the @library{sexps syntax}
library.  Notice that to use it we may need to import the libraries with
the following specifications:

@example
(for (sexps)        expand run)
(for (sexps syntax) expand run)
(for (sentinel)     expand run)
@end example

Macros created by @func{define-sexp-macro} are meant to provide a
friendly syntax for record constructors and the like; example:

@example
(define-record-type (<alpha> %make-<alpha> <alpha>?)
  (fields (mutable a)
          (mutable b)))

(define-sexp-macro make-<alpha>
  ((?a 1) (?b 2))
  `(,(sexp-any (sexp-or `(a ,(sexp-var ?a))
                        `(b ,(sexp-var ?b)))))
  `(%make-<alpha> ,?a ,?b))

(let ((o (make-<alpha>)))
  (list (<alpha>-a o)
        (<alpha>-b o)))
@result{} (1 2)

(let ((o (make-<alpha> (a 10))))
  (list (<alpha>-a o)
        (<alpha>-b o)))
@result{} (10 2)

(let ((o (make-<alpha> (b 20))))
  (list (<alpha>-a o)
        (<alpha>-b o)))
@result{} (1 20)

(let ((o (make-<alpha> (a 10)
                       (b 20))))
  (list (<alpha>-a o)
        (<alpha>-b o)))
@result{} (10 20)

(let* ((the-a   10)
       (the-b   20)
       (o       (make-<alpha> (a the-a)
                              (b the-b))))
  (list (<alpha>-a o)
        (<alpha>-b o)))
@result{} (10 20)

(let* ((x 10)
       (y 20)
       (o (make-<alpha> (a (+ 2 x))
                        (b (- 2 y)))))
  (list (<alpha>-a o)
        (<alpha>-b o)))
@result{} (12 -18)
@end example

@noindent
if a sexp variable referenced in the output form is left unbound by the
input form, and its default value is the sentinel, an assertion
violation is raised at expand time.


@deffn Syntax define-sexp-macro @var{name} ((@var{var} @var{default}) ...) @var{pattern} @var{output}
Define a new macro and bind it to @var{name}.  The defined macro applies
a transformer to its arguments and builds a processed output form, which
is then evaluated at run time.

The @var{var} and @var{default} arguments are like the ones of
@func{let-sexp-variables}, and they define the set of variables needed
by the output form.

The @var{pattern} and @var{output} arguments are like the ones of
@func{make-sexp-transformer}, and they are used to build the transformer
procedure.
@end deffn

@c page
@node matches
@chapter Pattern matching


The @library{matches} library implements @dfn{pattern matching}, also
known as @dfn{destructuring bind}.

@menu
* matches intro::               Introduction.
* matches match::               Basic pattern matching.
* matches condition::           Mismatch error condition.
* matches syntax::              The pattern syntax.
@end menu

@c page
@node matches intro
@section Introduction


@library{matches} is a simple generative pattern matcher; each pattern
is expanded into the required tests, calling a failure continuation if
the tests fail.  This makes the logic easy to follow and extend, but
produces sub-optimal code in cases where you have many similar clauses
due to repeating the same tests.

Nonetheless a smart compiler should be able to remove the redundant
tests.  For ``match let'' and ``destructuring bind'' type uses there is
no performance hit.

@c page
@node matches match
@section Basic pattern matching


@deffn Syntax match @var{sexp} @var{clause} ...
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} =>
Match the S--expression @var{sexp} against the @var{clause} arguments;
each clause is one of:

@example
(@cmeta{pattern} . @cmeta{body})
(@cmeta{pattern} (=> next) . @cmeta{body})
@end example

@var{expr} is evaluated and matched against each @meta{pattern} in turn;
the first to succeed causes the corresponding @meta{body} forms to be
evaluated as in @func{begin}, and the remaining patterns are ignored.
However, if the @samp{next} identifier is labeled, it may be used as a
continuation to continue matching, allowing for additional runtime tests
on the pattern.

The syntax for the patterns is:

@table @samp
@item *
Matches anything.

@item literal
Matches with @func{equal?}.

@item (quote sexp)
A literal S--expression.

@item pattern-var
Matches anything and binds @samp{pattern-var} to it.

@item (pattern1 --- patternN)
Proper list of @math{n} elements.

@item (pattern1 --- patternN . patternN+1)
Improper list of @math{n} or more elements.

@item (pattern1 --- patternN patternN+1 ...)
List of @math{n} or more elements with terminating ellipsis; each
element of remainder must match @samp{patternN+1}.

@item #(pattern1 --- patternN)
Vector of @math{n} elements.

@item #(pattern1 --- patternN patternN+1 ...)
Vector of @math{n} or more elements with terminating ellipsis; each
element of remainder must match @samp{patternN+1}.

@item (and pattern ---)
If all of @samp{pattern} match.

@item (or pattern ---)
If any of @samp{pattern} match.

@item (not pattern ---)
If all @samp{pattern} don't match at all.

@item (? pred pattern ---)
If @samp{pred} is true and all @samp{pattern} match.

@item ($ proc pattern)
If @samp{pattern} matches the result of applying @samp{proc} to the
expression.

@item (get! @cmeta{symbol})
Match anything and bind to @meta{symbol} a thunk which, when evaluated,
returns the matched element itself.

@item (set! @cmeta{symbol})
Match anything and bind to @meta{symbol} a function which, when applied
to a value, replaces the expression with that value.  This involves the
use of @func{set-car!}, @func{set-cdr!} and other mutators.
@end table
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax match-let ((@meta{pattern} @meta{expression}) ...) . @meta{body}
@deffnx Syntax match-let @meta{variable} ((@meta{pattern} @meta{expression}) ...) . @meta{body}
@deffnx Syntax match-let* ((@meta{pattern} @meta{expression}) ...) . @meta{body}
@deffnx Syntax match-letrec ((@meta{pattern} @meta{expression}) ...) . @meta{body}
Match each @cmeta{expression} against each @meta{pattern} and, if all
the matches are successful, evaluate @cmeta{body} in the resulting
environment.  If a pattern does not match, a mismatch error is raised;
these syntaxes are meant to provide destructuring, not to test if an
S--expression matches a pattern.

@example
(match-let ((x 1))
  x)
@result{} 1

(match-let (((x . y) '(1 . 2))
            (z       3))
  (list x y z))
@result{} (1 2 3)
@end example

These syntaxes are matching extensions of the corresponding @rnrs{6}
@func{let} syntaxes.  Notice that:

@example
(match-let ((* 1))
  *)
@result{} 1
@end example

@noindent
normal binding of variables takes precedence over pattern matching.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax match-lambda @meta{clause} ...
@deffnx Syntax match-lambda* @meta{clause} ...
Define a @func{lambda} which matches its arguments against a set of
patterns.

@example
(match-lambda @cmeta{clause} ...) @equiv{}
  (lambda (expr) (match expr @meta{clause} ...))

(match-lambda* @cmeta{clause} ...) @equiv{}
  (lambda expr (match expr @meta{clause} ...))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax match-lambda @var{name} @meta{clause} ...
@deffnx Syntax match-lambda* @var{name} @meta{clause} ...
Define a @func{lambda} which matches its arguments against a set of
patterns, binding it to @var{name}.

@example
(match-define @cmeta{name} @cmeta{clause} ...) @equiv{}
  (define @cmeta{name} (match-lambda @cmeta{clause} ...))

(match-define* @cmeta{name} @cmeta{clause} ...) @equiv{}
  (define @cmeta{name} (match-lambda* @cmeta{clause} ...))
@end example

Examples:

@example
(match-define one
  ((x y) (+ x y)))

(one '(1 2))
@result{} 3

(match-define* two
  ((x y) (+ x y)))

(two 1 2)
@result{} 3
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node matches condition
@section Mismatch error condition


When the expansion of @func{match}, or one of its derivatives, detects a
mismatch between the expression and all the patterns in the clauses, an
error is raised with condition type @samp{&match-mismatch}.


@deftp {Condition Type} &match-mismatch
Raised to signal an expression/pattern mismatch while evaluating the
expansion of @func{match}; it is derived from @samp{&mismatch}.  There
is only one field, @samp{expression}, which holds the mismatched
expression.
@end deftp


@defun make-match-mismatch @var{expression}
Build and return a condition of type @samp{&match-mismatch}.
@end defun


@defun match-mismatch? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a condition of type
@samp{&match-mismatch}.
@end defun


@defun match-mismatch-expression @var{obj}
Accessor for the @samp{expression} field of a @samp{&match-mismatch}
condition object.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax match-mismatch-error @var{who} @var{expression}
Raise a non--continuable exception with condition types:
@samp{&match-mismatch}, @samp{&message}, @samp{&who}.  All the arguments
are evaluated only once.
@end deffn

@c page
@node matches syntax
@section The pattern syntax


In this section we describe the syntax of the patterns and give examples
of expansion for the @func{match} macro.  The full expansion can be
quite big, with several nested @func{let} forms; for this reason, when
convenient, we show only a smaller but conceptually equivalent
expansion.

While expanding, the @func{match} macro introduces unique identifier
symbols bound to expressions; there is no way to directly reference
these identifiers in the body of a clause.  They are indicated here with
@samp{expr}, @samp{expr1}, @samp{expr2}, @dots{}

@menu
* matches syntax wildcard::     Matching anything with blind semantic
                                action.
* matches syntax literal::      Matching literal values.
* matches syntax clauses::      Multiple clauses.
* matches syntax quoted::       Matching quoted S--expressions.
* matches syntax lists::        Matching pairs and lists.
* matches syntax vectors::      Matching vectors.
* matches syntax variables::    Pattern variables.
* matches syntax pred::         Matching with predicates.
* matches syntax accessor::     Matching with accessor procedure.
* matches syntax logic::        Logic alternatives and negation.
* matches syntax quasiquote::   Matching quasiquotation.
* matches syntax getter::       Getting values out of the expression.
* matches syntax setter::       Mutating the expression's value.
* matches syntax continuation:: Continuing after mismatch.
* matches syntax ellipsis::     Matching an arbitrary number of
                                subexpressions.
* matches syntax macros::       Impossibility of using macros as
                                patterns.
@end menu

@c page
@node matches syntax wildcard
@subsection Mathing anything with blind semantic action


The wildcard pattern @samp{*} matches any expression and, when used
alone, it only allows the evaluation of code independent from the
expression itself.  A wildcard pattern usage looks like this:

@example
(match '(1 2 3)
  (* 'ok))
@result{} ok
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 2 3)))
  'ok)
@end example

@noindent
where @samp{expr} is a unique identifier symbol introduced by the
expansion of @func{match}; there is no way to reference such an
identifier in the body of a clause.

We understand that it does not matter what the expression is, because
the body of the wildcard pattern will always ignore it.

@c page
@node matches syntax literal
@subsection Matching literal values


Literal values can be matched by putting them in the pattern.  The usage
of a literal matcher for the number @samp{123} looks like this:

@example
(match 123
  (123 'ok))
@result{} ok
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 123))
  (if (equal? expr 123)
      'ok
    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
@end example

@noindent
if there is a mismatch an error will be raised:

@example
(match 9
  (123 'ok))
@error{} "no matching pattern"
@end example

Literal matching is performed with @func{equal?} (rather than
@func{eqv?} or @func{eq?}) because, when matching strings and
bytevectors, it makes use of the appropriate predicates @func{string=?}
and @func{bytevector=?} as mandated by @rnrs{6}.

A more specialised comparison function (like @func{=}) cannot be used
because literal matching has to fail gracefully when comparing, say, a
number with a string: @func{equal?} returns @false{}, while @func{=} and
@func{string=?} would raise an error.

@c page
@node matches syntax clauses
@subsection Multiple clauses


When a pattern fails to match an expression, @func{match} will try with
the next clause.  A multiple clause matcher usage looks like this:

@example
(match 2
  (1 'one)
  (2 'two)
  (* 'any))
@result{} two
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 2))
  (if (equal? expr 1)
      'one
    (if (equal? expr 2)
        'two
      'any)))
@end example

@noindent
we see that it detects the fact that the pattern in the last clause
matches everything; without the wildcard pattern:

@example
(match 2
  (1 'one)
  (2 'two))
@end example

@noindent
the expansion is equivalent to:

@example
(let ((expr 2))
  (if (equal? expr 1)
      'one
    (if (equal? expr 2)
        'two
      (match-mismatch-error 'match expr))))
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax quoted
@subsection Matching quoted S--expressions


Matching quoted S--expressions is similar to matching literals.  The
usage of a quoted sexp matcher for a symbol looks like this:

@example
(match 'alpha
  ('alpha 'ok))
@result{} ok

(match 'beta
  ('alpha 'ok))
@error{} no matching pattern
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 'alpha))
  (if (eq? expr 'alpha)
      'ok
    (match-matching-error 'match expr)))
@end example

The @func{match} macro can detect at expansion time whether the quoted
pattern is a symbol or a generic S--expression, so it can optimise the
expansion to use @func{eq?} or @func{equal?}.  The following usage
matches a generic S--expression:

@example
(match '(alpha (beta (delta 123)))
  ('(alpha (beta (delta 123))) 'ok))
@result{} ok

(match '(alpha (gamma (delta 123)))
  ('(alpha (beta (delta 123))) 'ok))
@error{} no matching pattern
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '(alpha (beta (delta 123)))))
  (if (equal? expr '(alpha (beta (delta 123))))
      'ok
    (match-matching-error 'match expr)))
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax lists
@subsection Matching pairs and lists


Pairs and lists in expressions can be matched by pairs and lists in the
pattern.  The usage of a pair matcher looks like this:

@example
(match '(1 . 2)
  ((1 . 2)
   'ok))
@result{} ok
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 . 2)))
  (if (pair? expr)
      (let ((expr1 (car expr))
            (expr2 (cdr expr)))
        (if (equal? expr1 1)
            (if (equal? expr2 2)
                'ok
              (match-mismatch-error 'match expr2))
          (match-mismatch-error 'match expr1)))
    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
@end example

@noindent
we see that the expression pair is destructured in its car and cdr, then
both are matched against the car and cdr of the pattern, which happen to
be literals in this example; if we isolate the parts related to matching
the pair we obtain:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 . 2)))
  (if (pair? expr)
      (let ((expr1 (car expr))
            (expr2 (cdr expr)))
        ---)
    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
@end example

@noindent
we can understand how multiple patterns are matched by nesting forms one
into the other.

If we just want to verify that the expression is a pair, we can use the
wildcards:

@example
(match '(1 . 2)
  ((* . *)
   'ok))
@result{} ok
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 . 2)))
  (if (pair? expr)
      (let ((expr1 (car expr))
            (expr2 (cdr expr)))
        ok)
    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
@end example

We can match a list of literals with the following code:

@example
(match '(1 2 3)
  ((1 2 3)
   'ok))
@result{} ok
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 2)))
  (if (pair? expr)
      (let ((expr1 (car expr))
            (expr2 (cdr expr)))
        (if (equal? expr1 1)
            (if (pair? expr2)
                (let ((expr3 (car expr2))
                      (expr4 (cdr expr2)))
                  (if (equal? expr3 2)
                      (if (null? expr4)
                          'ok
                        (match-mismatch-error 'match expr4))
                    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr3)))
              (match-mismatch-error 'match expr2))
          (match-mismatch-error 'match expr1)))
    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax vectors
@subsection Matching vectors


Vectors in expressions can be matched by vectors in the pattern.  The
usage of a vector matcher looks like this:

@example
(match '#(1 2)
  (#(1 2) 'ok))
@result{} ok
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '#(ok)))
  (if (vector? expr)
      (let ((len (vector-length expr)))
        (if (= len 2)
            (let ((expr1 (vector-ref expr 0)))
              (if (equal? expr1 1)
                  (let ((expr2 (vector-ref expr 1)))
                    (if (equal? expr2 2)
                        'ok
                      (check-mismatch-error 'match expr2)))
                (check-mismatch-error 'match expr1)))
          (check-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
@end example

An empty vector pattern matches an empty expression pattern:

@example
(match '#()
  (#() 'ok))
@result{} ok
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax variables
@subsection Pattern variables


Pattern variables match any expression and bind them to a known
identifier symbol.  A pattern variable usage looks like this:

@example
(match '(1 2 3)
  (alpha    alpha))
@result{} (1 2 3)
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 2 3)))
  (let ((alpha expr))
    alpha))
@end example

We understand that it does not matter what the expression is, because
@func{match} just binds it to the selected identifier.  We can reference
the identifier any number of times:

@example
(match '(1 2 3)
;; pattern  body
  (alpha    (list alpha alpha alpha)))
@result{} ((1 2 3) (1 2 3) (1 2 3))
@end example

@noindent
which expands to:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 2 3)))
  (let ((alpha expr))
    (list alpha alpha alpha)))
@end example

We can use the same variable multiple times in a single pattern; the
first time it will be bound to the expression, while the subsequent
times the new expression will be compared to the bound value using
@func{equal?}:

@example
(match '(1 1)
  ((X X) 'ok))
@result{} ok

(match '(1 2)
  ((X X) 'ok))
@error{} no matching pattern
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 1)))
  (let ((expr1 (car  expr))
        (expr2 (cadr expr)))
    (let ((X expr1))            ;1st time, bind expression
      (if (equal? expr2 X)      ;2nd time, compare previous
          'ok
        (match-mismatch-error 'match expr2)))))
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax pred
@subsection Matching with predicates


An expression can be matched agains a predicate: The match is positive
if the predicate applied to it evaluates to true.  A predicate pattern
usage looks like this:

@example
(match 123
  ((? integer?)
   'ok))
@result{} ok

(match 'alpha
  ((? integer?)
   'ok))
@error{} no matching pattern
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 123))
  (if (integer? expr)
      'ok
    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
@end example

We can add more predicates in the @samp{?} form and all of them are
tried if the predicate evaluates to true:

@example
(match 28
  ((? number? x)
   x))
@result{} 28
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 123))
  (if (integer? expr)
      (let ((x expr))
        'ok)
    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
@end example

More examples:

@example
(match 28
  ((? number? x y z)
   (list x y z)))
@result{} (28 28 28)

(match 28
  ((? number? (? integer? x))
   (+ 1 x)))
@result{} 29
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax accessor
@subsection Matching with accessor procedure


Matching a sexp with an accessor means that instead of matching the sexp
itself, we first apply a procedure to it and then try to match the
pattern against the result.  An accessor pattern usage looks like this:

@example
(match '(1 2)
  (($ car x)
   x))
@result{} 1
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 2)))
  (let ((expr1 (car expr)))
    (let ((x expr1))
      x)))
@end example

@noindent
we see that the pattern @samp{x} is matched against the result of
applying the accessor @func{car} to the expression.  It is mandatory to
specify a single pattern after the accessor in the @samp{$} form.

A notable use of this pattern is to access record fields:

@example
(define-record-type color
  (fields (immutable red)
          (immutable green)
          (immutable blue)))

(match (make-color 1 2 3)
  ((? color?
      ($ color-red   x)
      ($ color-green y)
      ($ color-blue  z))
   (list x y z)))
@result{} (1 2 3)

(match (make-color 1 2 3)
  ((? color?
      ($ color-red
         (? zero?))) 'ok)
  (* 'fail))
@result{} fail  ;because red is not zero
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax logic
@subsection Logic alternatives and negation


We can compose patterns using a logical AND or a logical OR.  We can
also negate the matching of a pattern.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Logical conjunction

A logical AND pattern usage looks like this:

@example
(match 123
  ((and (? number?)
        (? positive?)
        x)
   x))
@result{} 123
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 123))
  (if (number? expr)
      (if (positive? expr)
          (let ((x expr))
            x)
        (match-mismatch-error 'match expr))
    (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
@end example

@noindent
the code performing the matching is simply nested referencing the same
expression.  An empty @samp{and} pattern will match everything, it is
equivalent to the wildcard @samp{*}:

@example
(match 123
  ((and) 'ok))
@result{} ok
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Logical disjunction

A logical OR pattern usage looks like this:

@example
(match 123
  ((or (? number? x)
       (? symbol? x))
   x))
@result{} 123

(match 'alpha
  ((or (? number? x)
       (? symbol? x))
   x))
@result{} alpha
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 123))
  (let ((success (lambda (x) x)))
    (if (number? expr)
        (let ((x expr))
          (success x))
      (if (symbol? expr)
          (let ((x expr))
            (success x))
        (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))))
@end example

@noindent
the @samp{success} procedure is the ``success continuation''; it takes
as arguments one value for each of the pattern variables in each of the
@samp{or} alternative patterns.  All the pattern variables defined in an
@samp{or} alternative must be defined in all the other, else an error
will occur.  (The @samp{success} identifier is introduced by
@func{match} while expanding, so it cannot be referenced directly in the
body of a clause.)

The above example is correct because @samp{x} is defined in both the
alternative patterns, the following example is wrong:

@example
(match 123
  ((or (? integer? x)
       (? symbol?  y))
   y))
@error{} unbound identifier
@end example

@noindent
because it expands to:

@example
(let ((expr 123))
  (let ((success (lambda (x y) y)))
    (if (integer? expr)
        (let ((x expr))
          (success x y))        ;undefined y
      (if (symbol? expr)
          (let ((y expr))
            (success x y))      ;undefined x
        (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))))
@end example

An empty @samp{or} pattern matches nothing, it always fails:

@example
(match 123
  ((or) 'fail))
@error{} no matching pattern
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Logical negation

A logical NOT pattern usage looks like this:

@example
(match 123
  ((not (? symbol?))
   'ok))
@result{} ok
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 123))
  (if (symbol? expr)
      (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)
    'ok))
@end example

Notice that the following will raise an error:

@example
(match 123
  ((not (? symbol? x))
   x))
@error{} unbound identifier x
@end example

@noindent
because the @samp{?} pattern fails to match, so @samp{x} is not bound
when the body evaluates; we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 123))
  (if (symbol? expr)
      (let ((x expr))
        (match-mismatch-error 'match expr))
    'ok))
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax quasiquote
@subsection Matching quasiquotation


The patterns in the clauses are like quoted S--expressions:

@example
(let ((x 9))
  (match 1
    (x x)))
@result{} 1
@end example

@noindent
the @samp{x} in the pattern is a pattern variable which shadows the
outer @samp{x} binding.

Despite this, we can insert a runtime value in the pattern matching
forms using @samp{quasiquote} forms; only single values can be inserted
like this (rather than chunks of patterns), the pattern specification
remains unchanged.  A @samp{quasiquote} pattern usage looks like this:

@example
(let ((x 1))
  (match 1
    (`,x 'ok)
    (*   'fail)))
@result{} ok
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((x 1))
  (let ((expr 1))
    (let ((pattern `,x))
      (if (equal? pattern expr)
          'ok
        'fail))))
@end example

Let's see other examples:

@example
(let ((x 2))
  (match '(1 2 3)
    ((* `,x y) y)
    (*         'fail)))
@result{} 3

(let ((x 10))
  (match '(1 2 3)
    ((* `,(- x 8) y)
     y)))
@result{} 3

(let ((x '(2 3)))
  (match '(1 2 3 4)
    (`(1 ,@@x 4)   'ok)))
@result{} ok
@end example

The @samp{quasiquote} mechanism can be used to select predicates and
accessors, too:

@example
(let ((pred number?))
  (match 28
    ((? `,pred) 'ok)))
@result{} ok

(let ((f (lambda (x) (+ 1 x))))
  (match 2
    (($ `,f x) x)))
@result{} 3
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax getter
@subsection Getting values out of the expression


A getter expression matcher looks like this:

@example
(match 2
  ((get! two)
   (two)))
@result{} 2
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 2))
  (let ((two (lambda () expr)))
    (two)))
@end example

@noindent
so the @samp{(get! two)} pattern instructs @func{match} to define a
thunk that can be used to retrieve the expression itself.  We understand
that the single argument @meta{getter} in the abstract pattern
@samp{(get! @cmeta{getter})} must be an indentifier.  We can evaluate
the thunk any number of times.

Let's look at another example:

@example
(match '(1 2 3)
  ((* (get! two) *)
   (two)))
@result{} 2
@end example

@noindent
we can think of this as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr '(1 2 3)))
  (let ((expr1 (cadr expr)))
    (let ((two (lambda () expr1)))
      (two))))
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax setter
@subsection Mutating the expression's value


A setter expression matcher looks like this:

@example
(let ((x 1))
  (match x
    ((set! doit)
     (doit 3)))
  x)
@result{} 3
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((x 1))
  (let ((expr x))
    (let ((doit (lambda (y) (set! x y))))
      (doit 3)))
  x)
@end example

@noindent
so the @samp{(set! doit)} pattern instructs @func{match} to define a
procedure that can be used to store a new value in the expression
itself.  We understand that the single argument @meta{setter} in the
abstract pattern @samp{(set! @cmeta{setter})} must be an indentifier.
We can evaluate the procedure any number of times.

For a composite expression, @func{match} tries to select the correct
mutator:

@example
(let ((x '(1 . 2)))
  (match x
    (((set! doit) . *)
     (doit 3)))
  x)
@result{} (3 . 2)
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((x '(1 . 2)))
  (let ((expr x))
    (if (pair? expr)
        (let ((expr1 (car expr))
              (expr2 (cdr expr)))
          (let ((doit (lambda (y) (set-car! x y))))
            (doit 3)))
      (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
  x)
@end example

@noindent
and for a cadr setter:

@example
(let ((x '(1 2 3)))
  (match x
    ((* (set! doit) *)
     (doit 9)))
  x)
@result{} (1 9 3)
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((x '(1 2 3)))
  (let ((expr x))
    (if (pair? expr)
        (let ((expr1 (car expr))
              (expr2 (cdr expr)))
          (if (pair? expr2)
              (let ((doit (lambda (y) (set-car! (cdr x) y))))
                (doit 3))
            (match-mismatch-error 'match expr2)))
      (match-mismatch-error 'match expr)))
  x)
@end example

The setter works only when the expression is an identifier or a
composite object like a list or vector, the following will fail:

@example
(match 1
  ((and (set! doit)
        x)
   (doit 3)
   x))
@error{} invalid expression (set! 1 3)
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax continuation
@subsection Continuing after mismatch


A ``matcher continuation'' is a thunk we can invoke to jump to the next
matcher clause; we can use it to step to the next matching clause after
we have determined, in the body of a clause, that the expression does
not fit some criteria.  A matcher continuation use looks like this:

@example
(match 3

  ((? positive? x)
   (=> next)
   (if (even? x)
       x
     (next)))

  (* 0))
@result{} 0
@end example

@noindent
we can think of it as expanding to:

@example
(let ((expr 3))
  (let ((next (lambda ()
                0)))
    (if (positive? expr)
        x
      (next))))
@end example

@c page
@node matches syntax ellipsis
@subsection Matching an arbitrary number of subexpressions


The special ellipsis pattern @samp{...} can be used to match an
arbitrary number of subexpressions against the same pattern.  A usage of
ellipsis in a list looks like:

@example
(match '(a b c d)
  ((x ...)
   x))
@result{} (a b c d)

(match '(a b c d)
  ((x y ...)
   (list x y)))
@result{} (a (b c d))
@end example

@noindent
all the elements of the list expression are matched against the pattern
variable @samp{x}, which is bound to the list of matched expressions.
The same happens with vector patterns:

@example
(match '#(a b c d)
  (#(x ...)
   x))
@result{} (a b c d)

(match '#(a b c d)
  (#(x y ...)
   (list x y)))
@result{} (a (b c d))
@end example

Currently (Fri Sep 4, 2009) the ellipsis can appear only as last element
of a pattern vector; instead, other patterns can appear after an
ellipsis in a list pattern, but only one ellipsis is allowed in a list
pattern.

@example
(match '(a b c d)
  ((x ... y z)
   (list x y z)))
@result{} ((a b) c d)

(match '(a b c d)
  ((x ... y z w v)
   (list x y z w v)))
@result{} (() a b c d)

(match '(a b (c d))
  ((x ... (y ...))
   (list x y)))
@result{} ((a b) (c d))

(match '(a b #(c d))
  ((x ... #(y ...))
   (list x y)))
@result{} ((a b) (c d))

(match '(1 2 3)
  (((? odd? n) ...)     ;no match, not all odd
   n)
  (((? even? n) ...)    ;no match, not all even
   n)
  (((? number? n) ...)  ;match, all numbers
   n))
@result{} (1 2 3)
@end example



@c page
@node matches syntax macros
@subsection Impossibility of using macros as patterns


We may be tempted to use a macro to define a pattern, that is to try the
following:

@example
(define-syntax it
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?var)
     (* ?var *))))

(match '(1 2 3)
  ((it x) x)
  (*      'fail))
@result{} fail
@end example

@noindent
the reason the result is @samp{fail} rather than @samp{2} is that, when
expanding macros in an @rnrs{6} system, ``outer'' ones are expanded
first.  So @func{match} is expanded before @func{it}, and this results
in destructuring the form @samp{(it x)}, which disappears in the
expansion; the macro @func{it} is never used.

We can see the same mechanism in the following example:

@example
(let-syntax ((one (syntax-rules ()
                    ((_)
                     1)))
             (two (syntax-rules ()
                    ((_ ?v)
                     (quote ?v)))))
  (two (one)))
@result{} (one)
@end example

@c page
@node irregex
@chapter IrRegular expressions


The @library{irregex} library is an implementation of regular
expressions; it supports both @posix{} syntax with various (irregular)
Perl--Compatible Regular Expressions (@acronym{PCRE}) extensions, as
well as SCSH's Scheme Regular Expressions (@acronym{SRE}) syntax, with
various aliases for commonly used patterns.

Deterministic Finite Automata (@acronym{DFA}) matching is used when
possible, otherwise a closure--compiled Nondeterministic Finite Automata
(@acronym{NFA}) approach is
used.@footnote{See @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automata_theory}.}

The library is derived from IrRegex, an implementation of regular
expressions by Alex Shinn; only small changes were needed for
integration into Nausicaa.  The original package is distributed under a
@acronym{BSD} style license (@pxref{credits, Credits}) and can be
downloaded from:

@center @url{http://synthcode.com/}

@menu
* irregex conventions::         Conventions.
* irregex pred::                Predicates.
* irregex compile::             Compiling regular expressions.
* irregex match::               Match objects.
* irregex replace::             Replacing substrings.
* irregex chunk::               Chunked string matching.
* irregex misc::                Miscellaneous functions.
* irregex pcre::                Supported @acronym{PCRE} syntax.
* irregex sre::                 Extended @acronym{SRE} syntax.
@end menu

@c page
@node irregex conventions
@section Conventions


In the documentation of the @library{irregex} functions, the following
conventions for arguments names are used:

@table @var
@item pcre
A string representing a regular expression in @posix{} syntax, with
@acronym{PCRE} extensions.

@item sre
A symbolic expression (a list) representing an @acronym{SRE} regular
expression in SCSH syntax.

@item irx
A regular expression in one of the following forms: string in
@posix{}/@acronym{PCRE} syntax; symbolic expression in @acronym{SRE}
syntax; a precompiled regular expression value.

@item str
A string.

@item start
@itemx past
Non--negative, exact integers representing indexes usually into a
string.  @var{start} is the index of the first code point in a selected
substring; @var{past} is the index of the code point past the last code
point included in the selected substring.

@item obj
Can be any value.
@end table

@c page
@node irregex pred
@section Predicates


@defun {irregex?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a compiled regular expression.  Compiled
regular expression values are disjoint from all the other Scheme types.
@end defun


@defun {irregex-match-data?} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a successful match result from
@func{irregex-search} or @func{irregex-match}.  Match data values are
disjoint from all the other Scheme types.
@end defun

@c page
@node irregex compile
@section Compiling regular expressions


@defun irregex @var{pcre/sre} @var{options} ...
@defunx {string->irregex} @var{pcre} @var{options} ...
@defunx {sre->irregex} @var{sre} @var{options} ...
Compile a regular expression from either a @posix{}--style regular
expression string (with most @acronym{PCRE} extensions) or an
SCSH--style @acronym{SRE}.  Return an object representing the compiled
regular expression.

There is no @code{(rx ...)} syntax to specify the regular expression, we
just use normal Scheme lists.  Technically a string by itself could be
considered a valid @acronym{SRE}, so if we want to just match a literal
string we should use something like:

@example
(irregex `(: ,str))
@end example

@noindent
or use the explicit:

@example
(string->irregex str)
@end example

The optional @var{options} are a list of any of the following symbols,
which must be quoted:

@table @code
@item i
@itemx case-insensitive
match case--insensitively;

@item m
@itemx multi-line
treat string as multiple lines (effects @code{^} and @code{$});

@item s
@item single-line
treat string as a single line (@code{.} can match newline);

@item utf8
@utf{}-8 mode, assumes strings are byte--strings;

@item fast
try to optimize the regular expression;

@item small
try to compile a smaller regular expression.
@end table

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The @code{fast} and @code{small} options may not actually
make the compiled expression any faster or smaller at the moment.
@end quotation
@end defun

@c page
@node irregex match
@section Match objects


@defun irregex-search @var{irx} @var{str}
@defunx irregex-search @var{irx} @var{str} @var{start}
@defunx irregex-search @var{irx} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
Search for any instance of the pattern @var{irx} in @var{str},
optionally between the given range.  If a match is found, return a match
object, otherwise @false{}.  Match objects can be used to query the
selected substring or its submatches using the @func{irregex-match-*}
procedures below.  Examples:

@example
(irregex-search "[a-z]+" "123abc456")
@result{} ... ; match object

(irregex-search "[a-z]+" "123456")
@result{} #f

(irregex-search "foobar" "abcFOOBARdef")
@result{} #f

(irregex-search (string->irregex "foobar"
                                 'case-insensitive)
                "abcFOOBARdef")
@result{} ... ; match object
@end example

Matching follows the @posix{} leftmost, longest semantics, when
searching.  That is, of all possible matches in the string,
@func{irregex-search} will return the match at the first position
(leftmost).  If multiple matches are possible from that same first
position, the longest match is returned.
@end defun


@defun irregex-match @var{irx} @var{str}
Like @func{irregex-search}, but performs an anchored match against the
beginning and end of the string, without searching.

Examples:

@example
(irregex-match '(w/nocase "foobar") "abcFOOBARdef")
@result{} #f

(irregex-match '(w/nocase "foobar") "FOOBAR")
@result{} ... ; match object
@end example
@end defun


@defun irregex-match-substring @var{match-obj}
@defunx irregex-match-substring @var{match-obj} @var{index-or-name}
@defunx irregex-match-start-index @var{match-obj} @var{index-or-name}
@defunx irregex-match-end-index @var{match-obj} @var{index-or-name}
Fetch the matched substring (or its start or end offset) at the given
submatch index, or named submatch.  The entire match is index 0, the
first 1, etc.  The default is index 0.  Examples:

@example
(irregex-match-substring
   (irregex-search "ciao" "hello ciao salut")
   0)
@result{} "ciao"

(let ((match (irregex-search "c(i(a(o)))"
                             "hello ciao salut")))
;;;                           01234567890123456

  (irregex-match-substring match)       @result{} "ciao"
  (irregex-match-substring match 0)     @result{} "ciao"
  (irregex-match-substring match 1)     @result{} "iao"
  (irregex-match-substring match 2)     @result{} "ao"
  (irregex-match-substring match 3)     @result{} "o"

  (irregex-match-start-index match 0)   @result{} 6
  (irregex-match-past-index match 0))   @result{} 10
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node irregex replace
@section Replacing substrings


@defun irregex-replace @var{irx} @var{str} [@var{replacements} ...]
@defunx {irregex-replace/all} @var{irx} @var{str} [@var{replacements} ...]
Match a pattern in a string, and replaces it with a (possibly empty)
list of substitutions.  Each @var{replacement} can be either a string
literal, a numeric index, a symbol (as a named submatch), or a procedure
which takes one argument (the match object) and returns a string.

@func{irregex-replace} will replace only the first match, while
@func{irregex-replace/all} will replace all of them.

Examples:

@example
(irregex-replace "[aeiou]" "hello world" "*")
@result{} "h*llo world"

(irregex-replace/all "[aeiou]" "hello world" "*")
@result{} "h*ll* w*rld"
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node irregex chunk
@section Chunked string matching


It's often desirable to perform regular expression matching over
sequences of characters not represented as a single string.  The most
obvious example is a text--buffer data structure, but we may also want
to match over lists or trees of strings (i.e. ropes), over only certain
ranges within a string, over an input port, etc.

With existing regular expression libraries, the only way to accomplish
this is by converting the abstract sequence into a freshly allocated
string.  This can be expensive, or even impossible if the object is a
text--buffer opened onto a 500MB file.

@library{irregex} provides a chunked string @api{} specifically for this
purpose.


@defun make-irregex-chunker @var{get-next} @var{get-string}
@defunx make-irregex-chunker @var{get-next} @var{get-string} @var{get-start}
@defunx make-irregex-chunker @var{get-next} @var{get-string} @var{get-start} @var{get-end}
@defunx make-irregex-chunker @var{get-next} @var{get-string} @var{get-start} @var{get-end} @var{get-next}
@defunx make-irregex-chunker @var{get-next} @var{get-string} @var{get-start} @var{get-end} @var{get-next} @var{get-substring}
@defunx make-irregex-chunker @var{get-next} @var{get-string} @var{get-start} @var{get-end} @var{get-next} @var{get-substring} @var{get-subchunk}
Define a chunking @api{}.

@table @code
@item (@var{get-next} chunk)
Return the next chunk, or @false{} if there are no more chunks.

@item (@var{get-string} chunk)
A string source for the chunk.

@item (@var{get-start} chunk)
The start index of the result of @var{get-string} (defaults to always 0).

@item (@var{get-end} chunk)
The end (exclusive) of the string (defaults to @func{string-length} of
the source string).

@item (@var{get-substring} @var{cnk1} @var{i} @var{cnk2} @var{j})
A substring for the range between the chunk @var{cnk1} starting at index
@var{i} and ending at @var{cnk2} at index @var{j}.

@item (@var{get-subchunk} @var{cnk1} @var{i} @var{cnk2} @var{j})
As above but returns a new chunked data type instead of a string
(optional).
@end table

There are two important constraints on the @var{get-next} procedure.  It
must return an @func{eq?} identical object when called multiple times on
the same chunk, and it must not return a chunk with an empty string
(start == past).  This second constraint is for performance reasons, we
push the work of possibly filtering empty chunks to the chunker since
there are many chunk types for which empty strings aren't possible, and
this work is thus not needed.  Note that the initial chunk passed to
match on is allowed to be empty.

@var{get-substring} is provided for possible performance improvements,
without it a default is used.

@var{get-subchunk} is optional, but without it we cannot use
@func{irregex-match-subchunk}.
@end defun


@defun irregex-match-subchunk @var{match-obj}
@defunx irregex-match-subchunk @var{match-obj} @var{index-or-name}
Generate a chunked data--type for the given match item, of the same type
as the underlying chunk type.  This is only available if the chunk type
specifies the @func{get-subchunk} @api{}, otherwise an error is raised.
@end defun


@defun {irregex-search/chunked} @var{irx} @var{chunker} @var{chunk}
@defunx {irregex-match/chunked} @var{irx} @var{chunker} @var{chunk}
These return normal match--data objects.

Example: To match against a simple, flat list of strings use:

@example
(define (rope->string rope1 start rope2 end)
  (if (eq? rope1 rope2)
      (substring (car rope1) start end)
      (let loop ((rope (cdr rope1))
                 (res (list (substring (car rope1) start))))
         (if (eq? rope rope2)
             (string-concatenate-reverse      ; from SRFI-13
              (cons (substring (car rope) 0 end) res))
             (loop (cdr rope) (cons (car rope) res))))))

(define rope-chunker
  (make-irregex-chunker (lambda (x)
                          (and (pair? (cdr x)) (cdr x)))
                        car
                        (lambda (x)
                          0)
                        (lambda (x)
                          (string-length (car x)))
                        rope->string))

(irregex-search/chunked <pat> rope-chunker <list-of-strings>)
@end example

Here we are just using the default start, end and substring behaviors,
so the above chunker could simply be defined as:

@example
(define rope-chunker
  (make-irregex-chunker (lambda (x)
                          (and (pair? (cdr x)) (cdr x)))
                        car))
@end example
@end defun


@defun irregex-fold/chunked @var{irx} @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{chunker} @var{chunk}
@defunx irregex-fold/chunked @var{irx} @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{chunker} @var{chunk} @var{finish}
@defunx irregex-fold/chunked @var{irx} @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{chunker} @var{chunk} @var{finish} @var{start-index}
Chunked version of @func{irregex-fold}.
@end defun


@c page
@node irregex misc
@section Miscellaneous functions


@defun irregex-fold @var{irx} @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{str} [@var{finish} @var{start} @var{past}]
This follows the @api{} for @func{regexp-fold} from SCSH.  The
@var{kons} procedure takes the following signature:

@example
(@var{kons} <from-index> <match> <seed>)
@end example

@noindent
where @code{@meta{from-index}} is the index from where we started
searching (initially @var{start} and thereafter the past index of the
last match); @code{@meta{match}} is the resulting match data object;
@code{@meta{seed}} is the accumulated fold result starting with
@var{knil}.

The rationale for providing the @code{@meta{from-index}} is because this
information is useful (e.g. for extracting the unmatched portion of the
string before the current match, as needed in @func{irregex-replace}),
and not otherwise directly accessible.

The optional @var{finish} takes two arguments:

@example
(@var{finish} <from-index> <seed>)
@end example

@noindent
which simiarly allows us to pick up the unmatched tail of the string,
and defaults to just returning the @code{@meta{seed}}.

@var{start} and @var{past} select a substring of @var{str}.

To extract all instances of a match out of a string, we can use:

@example
(map irregex-match-substring
  (irregex-fold <irx>
                (lambda (i m s)
                  (cons m s))
                '()
                <str>
                (lambda (i s)
                  (reverse s))))
@end example
@end defun


@defun irregex-quote @var{str}
Return a new string with any special regular expression characters
escaped, to match the original string literally in @posix{} regular
expressions.
@end defun


@defun irregex-opt @var{list-of-strings}
Return an optimized @posix{} string matching any of the literal strings
in the list, like Emacs' @func{regexp-opt}.  Note this optimization
doesn't help when @func{irregex} is able to build a @acronym{DFA}.
@end defun


@defun {sre->string} @var{sre}
Convert an @acronym{SRE} to a @posix{}--style regular expression string, if
possible.
@end defun

@c page
@node irregex pcre
@section Supported @acronym{PCRE} syntax


Since the @acronym{PCRE} syntax is so overwhelming complex, it's easier
to just list what @library{irregex} does @strong{not} support for now.
Refer to the @acronym{PCRE} documentation for details.@footnote{See
@url{http://pcre.org/pcre.txt}.  @aurl{} last verified Sun Jul 12,
2009.}

@itemize
@item
Unicode character classes (@code{\P}) are not supported, but will be in
an upcoming release.  @code{\C} named characters are not supported.

@item
Callbacks, subroutine patterns and recursive patterns are not supported.
@code{(*FOO)} patterns are not supported and may never be.

@item
@code{\G} and @code{\K} are not supported.

@item
Octal character escapes are not supported because they are ambiguous
with back--references; just use hex character escapes.
@end itemize

Other than that, everything should work, including named submatches,
zero--width assertions, conditional patterns, etc.

In addition, @code{\<} and @code{\>} act as beginning--of--word and
end--of--word marks, respectively, as in Emacs regular expressions.

The following chart gives a quick reference from @acronym{PCRE} form to
the @acronym{SRE} equivalent:

@example
;; basic syntax
"^"                     ;; bos (or eos inside (?m: ...))
"$"                     ;; eos (or eos inside (?m: ...))
"."                     ;; nonl
"a?"                    ;; (? a)
"a*"                    ;; (* a)
"a+"                    ;; (+ a)
"a??"                   ;; (?? a)
"a*?"                   ;; (*? a)
"a+?"                   ;; (+? a)
"a@{n,m@}"                ;; (** n m a)

;; grouping
"(...)"                 ;; (submatch ...)
"(?:...)"               ;; (: ...)
"(?i:...)"              ;; (w/nocase ...)
"(?-i:...)"             ;; (w/case ...)
"(?<name>...)"          ;; (=> <name>...)

;; character classes
"[aeiou]"               ;; ("aeiou")
"[^aeiou]"              ;; (~ "aeiou")
"[a-z]"                 ;; (/ "az") or (/ "a" "z")
"[[:alpha:]]"           ;; alpha

;; assertions
"(?=...)"               ;; (look-ahead ...)
"(?!...)"               ;; (neg-look-ahead ...)
"(?<=...)"              ;; (look-behind ...)
"(?<!...)"              ;; (neg-look-behind ...)
"(?(test)pass|fail)"    ;; (if test pass fail)
"(*COMMIT)"             ;; commit
@end example

@c page
@node irregex sre
@section Extended @acronym{SRE} Syntax


Scheme Regular Expressions were proposed by Olin Shivers.  The original
request for coments is available at:

@center @url{http://www.scsh.net/docu/post/sre.html}

@menu
* irregex sre syntax::          Syntax tables.
* irregex sre basic::           Basic patterns.
* irregex sre repetition::      Repetition patterns.
* irregex sre char-sets::       Character sets.
* irregex sre assertion::       Assertion patterns.
* irregex sre utility::         Utility patterns.
@end menu

@c page
@node irregex sre syntax
@subsection Syntax tables


The following tables summarizes the @acronym{SRE} syntax, with detailed
explanations following.

@example
;; basic patterns
<string>                          ; literal string
(seq <sre> ...)                   ; sequence
(: <sre> ...)
(or <sre> ...)                    ; alternation

;; optional/multiple patterns
(? <sre> ...)                     ; 0 or 1 matches
(* <sre> ...)                     ; 0 or more matches
(+ <sre> ...)                     ; 1 or more matches
(= <n> <sre> ...)                 ; exactly <n> matches
(>= <n> <sre> ...)                ; <n> or more matches
(** <from> <to> <sre> ...)        ; <n> to <m> matches
(?? <sre> ...)                    ; non-greedy (non-greedy) pattern: (0 or 1)
(*? <sre> ...)                    ; non-greedy kleene star
(**? <from> <to> <sre> ...)       ; non-greedy range

;; submatch patterns
(submatch <sre> ...)              ; numbered submatch
($ <sre> ...)
(submatch-named <name> <sre> ...) ; named submatch
(=> <name> <sre> ...)
(backref <n-or-name>)             ; match a previous submatch

;; toggling case-sensitivity
(w/case <sre> ...)                ; enclosed <sre>s are case-sensitive
(w/nocase <sre> ...)              ; enclosed <sre>s are case-insensitive

;; character sets
<char>                            ; singleton char set
(<string>)                        ; set of chars
(or <cset-sre> ...)               ; set union
(~ <cset-sre> ...)                ; set complement (i.e. [^...])
(- <cset-sre> ...)                ; set difference
(& <cset-sre> ...)                ; set intersection
(/ <range-spec> ...)              ; pairs of chars as ranges

;; named character sets
any
nonl
ascii
lower-case     lower
upper-case     upper
alphabetic     alpha
numeric        num
alphanumeric   alphanum  alnum
punctuation    punct
graphic        graph
whitespace     white     space
printing       print
control        cntrl
hex-digit      xdigit

;; assertions and conditionals
bos eos                           ; beginning/end of string
bol eol                           ; beginning/end of line
bow eow                           ; beginning/end of word
nwb                               ; non-word-boundary
(look-ahead <sre> ...)            ; zero-width look-ahead assertion
(look-behind <sre> ...)           ; zero-width look-behind assertion
(neg-look-ahead <sre> ...)        ; zero-width negative look-ahead assertion
(neg-look-behind <sre> ...)       ; zero-width negative look-behind assertion
(atomic <sre> ...)                ; for (?>...) independent patterns
(if <test> <pass> [<fail>])       ; conditional patterns
commit                            ; don't backtrack beyond this (i.e. cut)

;; backwards compatibility
(posix-string <string>)           ; embed a POSIX string literal
@end example

@c page
@node irregex sre basic
@subsection Basic patterns


The simplest @acronym{SRE} is a literal string, which matches that
string exactly.

@example
(irregex-search "needle" "hayneedlehay")
@result{} #<match>
@end example

By default the match is case--sensitive, though we can control this
either with the compiler flags or local overrides:

@example
(irregex-search "needle" "haynEEdlehay")
@result{} #f

(irregex-search (irregex "needle" 'i) "haynEEdlehay")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(w/nocase "needle") "haynEEdlehay")
@result{} #<match>
@end example

We can use @code{w/case} to switch back to case--sensitivity inside a
@code{w/nocase} or when the @acronym{SRE} was compiled with
@code{case-insensitive}:

@example
(irregex-search '(w/nocase "SMALL" (w/case "BIG")) "smallBIGsmall")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(w/nocase "small" (w/case "big")) "smallBIGsmall")
@result{} #f
@end example

Of course, literal strings by themselves aren't very interesting regular
expressions, so we want to be able to compose them.  The most basic way
to do this is with the @code{seq} operator (or its abbreviation
@code{:}), which matches one or more patterns consecutively:

@example
(irregex-search '(: "one" space "two" space "three") "one two three")
@result{} #<match>
@end example

The @code{w/case} and @code{w/nocase} operators allowed multiple
@acronym{SRE}s in a sequence; other operators that take any number of
arguments (e.g. the repetition operators below) allow such implicit
sequences.

To match any one of a set of patterns we use the @code{or} alternation
operator:

@example
(irregex-search '(or "eeney" "meeney" "miney") "meeney")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(or "eeney" "meeney" "miney") "moe")
@result{} #f
@end example

@c page
@node irregex sre repetition
@subsection Repetition patterns


There are several ways to control the number of times a pattern is
matched.  The simplest of these is @code{?} which just optionally
matches the pattern:

@example
(irregex-search '(: "match" (? "es") "!") "matches!")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: "match" (? "es") "!") "match!")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: "match" (? "es") "!") "matche!")
@result{} #f
@end example

To optionally match any number of times we use @code{*}, the Kleene
star:

@example
(irregex-search '(: "<" (* (~ #\>)) ">") "<html>")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: "<" (* (~ #\>)) ">") "<>")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: "<" (* (~ #\>)) ">") "<html")
@result{} #f
@end example

Often we want to match any number of times, but at least one time is
required, and for that we use @code{+}:

@example
(irregex-search '(: "<" (+ (~ #\>)) ">") "<html>")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: "<" (+ (~ #\>)) ">") "<a>")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: "<" (+ (~ #\>)) ">") "<>")
@result{} #f
@end example

More generally, to match at least a given number of times, we use
@code{>=}:

@example
(irregex-search '(: "<" (>= 3 (~ #\>)) ">") "<table>")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: "<" (>= 3 (~ #\>)) ">") "<pre>")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: "<" (>= 3 (~ #\>)) ">") "<tr>")
@result{} #f
@end example

To match a specific number of times exactly we use @code{=}:

@example
(irregex-search '(: "<" (= 4 (~ #\>)) ">") "<html>")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: "<" (= 4 (~ #\>)) ">") "<table>")
@result{} #f
@end example

And finally, the most general form is @code{**} which specifies a range
of times to match.  All of the earlier forms are special cases of this.

@example
(irregex-search '(: (= 3 (** 1 3 numeric) ".")
                    (** 1 3 numeric))
                "192.168.1.10")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-search '(: (= 3 (** 1 3 numeric) ".")
                    (** 1 3 numeric))
                "192.0168.1.10")
@result{} #f
@end example

There are also so--called ``non-greedy'' variants of these repetition
operators, by convention suffixed with an additional @code{?}.  Since
the normal repetition patterns can match any of the allotted repetition
range, these operators will match a string if and only if the normal
versions matched.  However, when the endpoints of which submatch matched
are taken into account (specifically, all matches when using
@func{irregex-search} since the endpoints of the match itself matter),
the use of a non--greedy repetition can change the result.

So, whereas @code{?} can be thought to mean ``match or don't match'',
@code{??} means ``don't match or match''.  @code{*} typically consumes
as much as possible, but @code{*?}  tries first to match zero times, and
only consumes one at a time if that fails.  If we have a greedy operator
followed by a non--greedy operator in the same pattern, they can produce
surprising results as they compete to make the match longer or shorter.
If this seems confusing, that's because it is.  Non--greedy repetitions
are defined only in terms of the specific backtracking algorithm used to
implement them, which for compatibility purposes always means the Perl
algorithm.  Thus, when using these patterns we force @library{irregex}
to use a backtracking engine, and can't rely on efficient execution.

@c page
@node irregex sre char-sets
@subsection Character sets


Perhaps more common than matching specific strings is matching any of a
set of characters.  We can use the @code{or} alternation pattern on a
list of single--character strings to simulate a character set, but this
is too clumsy for everyday use so @acronym{SRE} syntax allows a number
of shortcuts.

A single character matches that character literally, a trivial character
class.  More conveniently, a list holding a single element which is a
string, refers to the character set composed of every character in the
string.

@example
(irregex-match '(* #\-) "---")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-match '(* #\-) "-_-")
@result{} #f

(irregex-match '(* ("aeiou")) "oui")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-match '(* ("aeiou")) "ouais")
@result{} #f
@end example

Ranges are introduced with the @code{/} operator.  Strings or characters
in the @code{/} are flattened and then taken in pairs to represent the
start and end points, inclusive, of character ranges.

@example
(irregex-match '(* (/ "AZ09")) "R2D2")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-match '(* (/ "AZ09")) "C-3PO")
@result{} #f
@end example

In addition, a number of set algebra operations is provided.  @code{or},
of course, has the same meaning, but when all the options are character
sets it can be thought of as the set union operator.  This is further
extended by the @code{&} set intersection, @code{-} set difference, and
@code{~} set complement operators.

@example
(irregex-match '(* (& (/ "az") (~ ("aeiou")))) "xyzzy")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-match '(* (& (/ "az") (~ ("aeiou")))) "vowels")
@result{} #f

(irregex-match '(* (- (/ "az") ("aeiou"))) "xyzzy")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-match '(* (- (/ "az") ("aeiou"))) "vowels")
@result{} #f
@end example

@c page
@node irregex sre assertion
@subsection Assertion patterns


It can be useful to assert something about the area around a pattern,
without explicitly making it part of the pattern.  The most common cases
are specifically anchoring some pattern to the beginning or end of a
word or line or even the whole string.  For example, to match on the end
of a word:

@example
(irregex-match '(: "foo" eow) "foo")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-match '(: "foo" eow) "foo!")
@result{} #<match>

(irregex-match '(: "foo" eow) "foof")
@result{} #f
@end example

The @code{bow}, @code{bol}, @code{eol}, @code{bos} and @code{eos} work
similarly.  @code{nwb} asserts that you are not in a word--boundary; if
replaced with @code{eow} in the above examples it would reverse all the
results.

There is no @code{wb}, since we probably know from context whether it
would be the beginning or end of a word, but if we need it we can always
use @code{(or bow eow)}.

Somewhat more generally, Perl introduced positive and negative
@code{look-ahead} and @code{look-behind} patterns.  Perl's
@code{look-behind} patterns are limited to a fixed length, however the
@library{irregex} versions have no such limit.

@example
(irregex-match '(: "regular" (look-ahead " expression"))
               "regular expression")
@result{} #<match>
@end example

The most general case, of course, would be an @code{and} pattern to
complement the @code{or} pattern; all the patterns must match or the
whole pattern fails.  This may be provided in a future release, although
it (and @code{look-ahead} and @code{look-behind} assertions) are
unlikely to be compiled efficiently.

@c page
@node irregex sre utility
@subsection Utility patterns


The following utility regular expressions are also provided for common
patterns that people are eternally reinventing.  They are not
necessarily the official patterns matching the @rfc{} definitions
of the given data, because of the way that such patterns tend to be
used.  There are three general usages for regexps:

@table @emph
@item Searching
Search for a pattern matching a desired object in a larger text.

@item Validation
Determine whether an entire string matches a pattern.

@item Extraction
Given a string already known to be valid, extract certain fields from it
as submatches.
@end table

In some cases, but not always, these will overlap.  When they are
different, @func{irregex-search} will naturally always want the
searching version, so @library{irregex} provides that version.

As an example where these might be different, consider an @aurl{}.  If
we want to match all the @aurl{}s in some arbitrary text, we probably
want to exclude a period or comma at the tail end of an @aurl{}, since
it's more likely being used as punctuation rather than part of the
@aurl{}, despite the fact that it would be valid @aurl{} syntax.

Another problem with the @rfc{} definitions is the standard itself may
have become irrelevant.  For example, the pattern @library{irregex}
provides for email addresses doesn't match quoted local parts
(e.g. @code{"first last"@@domain.com}) because these are increasingly
rare, and unsupported by enough software that it's better to discourage
their use.  Conversely, technically consecutive periods
(e.g. @code{first..last@@domain.com}) are not allowed in email
addresses, but most email software does allow this, and in fact such
addresses are quite common in Japan.

The current patterns provided are:

@table @code
@item newline
General newline pattern (@code{crlf}, @code{cr}, @code{lf}).

@item integer
An integer.

@item real
A real number (including scientific).

@item string
A ``quoted'' string.

@item ipv4-address
A numeric decimal IPv4 address.

@item ipv6-address
A numeric hexadecimal IPv6 address.

@item domain
A domain name.

@item email
An email address.

@item http-url
A @aurl{} beginning with @code{https?://}.
@end table

Because of these issues the exact definitions of these patterns are
subject to change, but will be documented clearly when they are
finalized.  More common patterns are also planned, but as what we want
increases in complexity it's probably better to use a real parser.

@c page
@node pregexp
@chapter Portable regular expressions for Scheme


The @library{pregexp} library implements regular expressions parsing
modeled on Perl's, and includes such powerful directives as numeric and
non--greedy quantifiers, capturing and non--capturing clustering,
@posix{} character classes, selective case- and space--insensitivity,
backreferences, alternation, backtrack pruning, positive and negative
lookahead and lookbehind, in addition to the more basic directives
familiar to all regexp users.

The library is based upon the Pregexp package by Dorai Sitaram.  It was
modified to work with @rnrs{6} Scheme implementations and to fit into
the Nausicaa distribution.

@menu
* pregexp intro::               Introduction.
* pregexp api::                 Interface procedures.
* pregexp syntax::              The regexp pattern language.
* pregexp example::             An extended example.
@end menu

@c page
@node pregexp intro
@section Introduction


A @dfn{regexp} is a string that describes a pattern.  A regexp matcher
tries to match this pattern against (a portion of) another string, which
we will call the text string.  The text string is treated as raw text
and not as a pattern.

Most of the characters in a regexp pattern are meant to match
occurrences of themselves in the text string.  Thus, the pattern
@code{abc} matches a string that contains the characters @code{a},
@code{b}, @code{c} in succession.

In the regexp pattern, some characters act as metacharacters, and some
character sequences act as metasequences.  That is, they specify
something other than their literal selves.  For example, in the pattern
@code{a.c}, the characters @code{a} and @code{c} do stand for themselves
but the metacharacter @code{.} can match any character (other than
newline).  Therefore, the pattern @code{a.c} matches an @code{a},
followed by any character, followed by a @code{c}.

If we needed to match the character @code{.} itself, we escape it, ie,
precede it with a backslash (@code{\}).  The character sequence
@code{\.} is thus a metasequence, since it doesn't match itself but
rather just @code{.}.  So, to match @code{a} followed by a literal
@code{.}  followed by @code{c}, we use the regexp pattern
@code{a\\.c}.@footnote{The double backslash is an artifact of Scheme
strings, not the regexp pattern itself.  When we want a literal
backslash inside a Scheme string, we must escape it so that it shows up
in the string at all.  Scheme strings use backslash as the escape
character, so we end up with two backslashes; one Scheme--string
backslash to escape the regexp backslash, which then escapes the dot.
Another character that would need escaping inside a Scheme string is
@code{"}.}  Another example of a metasequence is @code{\t}, which is a
readable way to represent the tab character.

We will call the string representation of a regexp the U-regexp, where U
can be taken to mean Unix-style or universal, because this notation for
regexps is universally familiar.  Our implementation uses an
intermediate tree--like representation called the S-regexp, where S can
stand for Scheme, symbolic, or s-expression.  S-regexps are more verbose
and less readable than U-regexps, but they are much easier for Scheme's
recursive procedures to navigate.

@c page
@node pregexp api
@section Interface procedures


@defun pregexp @var{urex}
Takes a U-regexp, which is a string, and returns an S-regexp, which is a
tree.

@example
(pregexp "c.r")
@result{} (:sub (:or (:seq #\c :any #\r)))
@end example

There is rarely any need to look at the S-regexps returned by pregexp.
@end defun


@defun pregexp-match-positions @var{rex} @var{str}
@defunx pregexp-match-positions @var{rex} @var{str} @var{start}
@defunx pregexp-match-positions @var{rex} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
Take a regexp pattern, either a U- or an S-regexp, and a text string,
and return a match if the regexp matches (some part of) the text string.

Return @false{} if the regexp did not match the string; and a list of
index pairs if it did match.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "brain" "bird")
@result{} #f

(pregexp-match-positions "needle" "hay needle stack")
@result{} ((4 . 10))
@end example

In the second example, the integers @math{4} and @math{10} identify the
substring that was matched.  @math{4} is the starting (inclusive) index
and @math{10} the ending (exclusive) index of the matching substring.

@example
(substring "hay needle stack" 4 10)
@result{} "needle"
@end example

Here, @func{pregexp-match-positions}'s return list contains only one
index pair, and that pair represents the entire substring matched by the
regexp.  When we discuss subpatterns later, we will see how a single
match operation can yield a list of submatches.

@func{pregexp-match-positions} takes optional third and fourth arguments
that specify the indices of the text string within which the matching
should take place.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "needle"
  "his hay needle stack -- my hay needle stack -- her hay needle stack"
  24 43)
@result{} ((31 . 37))
@end example

Note that the returned indices are still reckoned relative to the full
text string.
@end defun


@defun pregexp-match @var{rex} @var{str}
@defunx pregexp-match @var{rex} @var{str} @var{start}
@defunx pregexp-match @var{rex} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
Like @func{pregexp-match-positions} but instead of returning index pairs
it returns the matching substrings:

@example
(pregexp-match "brain" "bird")
@result{} #f

(pregexp-match "needle" "hay needle stack")
@result{} ("needle")
@end example
@end defun


@defun pregexp-split @var{rex} @var{str}
Takes a regexp pattern and a text string, and return a list of
substrings of the text string, where the pattern identifies the
delimiter separating the substrings.

@example
(pregexp-split ":"
   "/bin:/usr/bin:/usr/bin/X11:/usr/local/bin")
@result{} ("/bin" "/usr/bin" "/usr/bin/X11" "/usr/local/bin")

(pregexp-split " " "pea soup")
@result{} ("pea" "soup")
@end example

If the first argument can match an empty string, then the list of all
the single--character substrings is returned.

@example
(pregexp-split "" "smithereens")
@result{} ("s" "m" "i" "t" "h" "e" "r" "e" "e" "n" "s")
@end example

To identify one--or--more spaces as the delimiter, take care to use the
regexp @code{" +"}, not @code{" *"}.

@example
(pregexp-split " +" "split pea     soup")
@result{} ("split" "pea" "soup")

(pregexp-split " *" "split pea     soup")
@result{} ("s" "p" "l" "i" "t" "p" "e" "a" "s" "o" "u" "p")
@end example
@end defun


@defun pregexp-replace @var{rex} @var{str} @var{replacement}
Replace the matched portion of the text string by another string.  The
first argument is the pattern, the second the text string, and the third
is the insert string (string to be inserted).

@example
(pregexp-replace "te" "liberte" "ty")
@result{} "liberty"
@end example

If the pattern doesn't occur in the text string, the returned string is
identical (@func{eq?}) to the text string.
@end defun


@defun pregexp-replace* @var{rex} @var{str} @var{replacement}
Replace all matches in the text string by the insert string:

@example
(pregexp-replace* "te" "liberte egalite fraternite" "ty")
@result{} "liberty egality fratyrnity"
@end example

If the pattern doesn't occur in the text string, the returned string is
identical (@func{eq?}) to the text string.
@end defun


@defun pregexp-quote
Take an arbitrary string and returns a U-regexp (string) that precisely
represents it.  In particular, characters in the input string that could
serve as regexp metacharacters are escaped with a backslash, so that
they safely match only themselves.

@example
(pregexp-quote "cons")
@result{} "cons"

(pregexp-quote "list?")
@result{} "list\\?"
@end example

@func{pregexp-quote} is useful when building a composite regexp from a
mix of regexp strings and verbatim strings.
@end defun

@c page
@node pregexp syntax
@section The regexp pattern language


Here is a complete description of the regexp pattern language recognized
by the pregexp procedures.

@menu
* pregexp syntax basic::        Basic assertions.
* pregexp syntax chars::        Characters and character classes.
* pregexp syntax quantifiers::  Quantifiers.
* pregexp syntax clusters::     Clusters.
* pregexp syntax alternation::  Alternation.
* pregexp syntax backtrack::    Backtracking.
* pregexp syntax look::         Looking ahead and behind.
@end menu

@c page
@node pregexp syntax basic
@subsection Basic assertions


The assertions @code{^} and @code{$} identify the beginning and the end
of the text string respectively.  They ensure that their adjoining
regexps match at one or other end of the text string.  Examples:

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "^contact" "first contact")
@result{} #f
@end example

The regexp fails to match because @code{contact} does not occur at the
beginning of the text string.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "laugh$" "laugh laugh laugh laugh")
@result{} ((18 . 23))
@end example

The regexp matches the last laugh.

The metasequence @code{\b} asserts that a word boundary exists.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "yack\\b" "yackety yack")
@result{} ((8 . 12))
@end example

The @code{yack} in @code{yackety} doesn't end at a word boundary so it
isn't matched.  The second @code{yack} does and is.

The metasequence @code{\B} has the opposite effect to @code{\b}: It
asserts that a word boundary does not exist.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "an\\B" "an analysis")
@result{} ((3 . 5))
@end example

The @code{an} that doesn't end in a word boundary is matched.

@c page
@node pregexp syntax chars
@subsection Characters and character classes


Typically a character in the regexp matches the same character in the
text string.  Sometimes it is necessary or convenient to use a regexp
metasequence to refer to a single character.  Thus, metasequences
@code{\n}, @code{\r}, @code{\t}, and @code{\.} match the newline,
return, tab and period characters respectively.

The metacharacter period (@code{.}) matches any character other than
newline.

@example
(pregexp-match "p.t" "pet")
@result{} ("pet")
@end example

It also matches @code{pat}, @code{pit}, @code{pot}, @code{put}, and
@code{p8t} but not @code{peat} or @code{pfffft}.

A character class matches any one character from a set of characters. A
typical format for this is the bracketed character class @code{[...]},
which matches any one character from the non--empty sequence of
characters enclosed within the brackets.@footnote{Requiring a bracketed
character class to be non-empty is not a limitation, since an empty
character class can be more easily represented by an empty string.}
Thus @code{p[aeiou]t} matches pat, pet, pit, pot, put and nothing else.

Inside the brackets, a hyphen (@code{-}) between two characters
specifies the @ascii{} range between the characters.  Eg,
@code{ta[b-dgn-p]} matches tab, tac, tad, and tag, and tan, tao, tap.

An initial caret (@code{^}) after the left bracket inverts the set
specified by the rest of the contents, ie, it specifies the set of
characters other than those identified in the brackets.  Eg,
@code{do[^g]} matches all three--character sequences starting with do
except dog.

Note that the metacharacter @code{^} inside brackets means something
quite different from what it means outside.  Most other metacharacters
(@code{.}, @code{*}, @code{+}, @code{?}, etc.) cease to be
metacharacters when inside brackets, although we may still escape them
for peace of mind.  @code{-} is a metacharacter only when it's inside
brackets, and neither the first nor the last character.

Bracketed character classes cannot contain other bracketed character
classes (although they contain certain other types of character classes;
see below).  Thus a left bracket (@code{[}) inside a bracketed character
class doesn't have to be a metacharacter; it can stand for itself.  Eg,
@code{[a[b]} matches @code{a}, @code{[}, and @code{b}.

Furthermore, since empty bracketed character classes are disallowed, a
right bracket (@code{]}) immediately occurring after the opening left
bracket also doesn't need to be a metacharacter.  Eg, @code{[]ab]}
matches @code{]}, @code{a}, and @code{b}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Some frequently used character classes

Some standard character classes can be conveniently represented as
metasequences instead of as explicit bracketed expressions.  @code{\d}
matches a digit (@code{[0-9]}); @code{\s} matches a whitespace
character; @code{\w} matches a character that could be part of a
``word''.@footnote{Following regexp custom, we identify ``word''
characters as @code{[A-Za-z0-9_]}, although these are too restrictive
for what a Schemer might consider a ``word''.}

The upper--case versions of these metasequences stand for the inversions
of the corresponding character classes.  Thus @code{\D} matches a
non--digit, @code{\S} a non--whitespace character, and @code{\W} a
non--``word'' character.

Remember to include a double backslash when putting these metasequences
in a Scheme string:

@example
(pregexp-match "\\d\\d"
               "0 dear, 1 have 2 read catch 22 before 9")
@result{} ("22")
@end example

These character classes can be used inside a bracketed expression.  Eg,
@code{[a-z\\d]} matches a lower--case letter or a digit.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @posix{} character classes

A @posix{} character class is a special metasequence of the form
@code{[:...:]} that can be used only inside a bracketed expression.  The
@posix{} classes supported are:

@table @code
@item [:alnum:]
Letters and digits.

@item [:alpha:]
Letters.

@item [:algor:]
The letters c, h, a and d.

@item [:ascii:]
7-bit ascii characters.

@item [:blank:]
Widthful whitespace, ie, space and tab.

@item [:cntrl:]
``Control'' characters, viz, those with code @math{< 32}.

@item [:digit:]
Digits, same as @code{\d}.

@item [:graph:]
Characters that use ink.

@item [:lower:]
Lower-case letters.

@item [:print:]
Ink-users plus widthful whitespace.

@item [:space:]
Whitespace, same as @code{\s}.

@item [:upper:]
Upper--case letters.

@item [:word:]
Letters, digits, and underscore, same as @code{\w}.

@item [:xdigit:]
Hex digits.
@end table

For example, the regexp @code{[[:alpha:]_]} matches a letter or
underscore.

@example
(pregexp-match "[[:alpha:]_]" "--x--")
@result{} ("x")

(pregexp-match "[[:alpha:]_]" "--_--")
@result{} ("_")

(pregexp-match "[[:alpha:]_]" "--:--")
@result{} #f
@end example

The @posix{} class notation is valid only inside a bracketed expression.
For instance, @code{[:alpha:]}, when not inside a bracketed expression,
will not be read as the letter class.  Rather it is (from previous
principles) the character class containing the characters :, a, l, p, h.

@example
(pregexp-match "[:alpha:]" "--a--")
@result{} ("a")

(pregexp-match "[:alpha:]" "--_--")
@result{} #f
@end example

By placing a caret (@code{^}) immediately after @code{[:}, we get the
inversion of that @posix{} character class.  Thus, @code{[:^alpha]} is
the class containing all characters except the letters.

@c page
@node pregexp syntax quantifiers
@subsection Quantifiers


The quantifiers @code{*}, @code{+}, and @code{?} match respectively:
zero or more, one or more, and zero or one instances of the preceding
subpattern.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "c[ad]*r" "cadaddadddr")
@result{} ((0 . 11))
(pregexp-match-positions "c[ad]*r" "cr")
@result{} ((0 . 2))

(pregexp-match-positions "c[ad]+r" "cadaddadddr")
@result{} ((0 . 11))
(pregexp-match-positions "c[ad]+r" "cr")
@result{} #f

(pregexp-match-positions "c[ad]?r" "cadaddadddr")
@result{} #f
(pregexp-match-positions "c[ad]?r" "cr")
@result{} ((0 . 2))
(pregexp-match-positions "c[ad]?r" "car")
@result{} ((0 . 3))
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading  Numeric quantifiers

We can use braces to specify much finer--tuned quantification than is
possible with @code{*}, @code{+}, @code{?}.

The quantifier @code{@{m@}} matches exactly @math{m} instances of the
preceding subpattern.  @math{m} must be a nonnegative integer.

The quantifier @code{@{m,n@}} matches at least @math{m} and at most
@math{n} instances.  @math{m} and @math{n} are nonnegative integers with
@math{m <= n}.  We may omit either or both numbers, in which case
@math{m} defaults to @math{0} and @math{n} to infinity.

It is evident that @code{+} and @code{?} are abbreviations for
@code{@{1,@}} and @code{@{0,1@}} respectively.  @code{*} abbreviates
@code{@{,@}}, which is the same as @code{@{0,@}}.

@example
(pregexp-match "[aeiou]@{3@}" "vacuous")
@result{} ("uou")

(pregexp-match "[aeiou]@{3@}" "evolve")
@result{} #f

(pregexp-match "[aeiou]@{2,3@}" "evolve")
@result{} #f

(pregexp-match "[aeiou]@{2,3@}" "zeugma")
@result{} ("eu")
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Non--greedy quantifiers

The quantifiers described above are greedy, i.e., they match the maximal
number of instances that would still lead to an overall match for the
full pattern.

@example
(pregexp-match "<.*>" "<tag1> <tag2> <tag3>")
@result{} ("<tag1> <tag2> <tag3>")
@end example

To make these quantifiers non--greedy, append a @code{?} to them.
Non--greedy quantifiers match the minimal number of instances needed to
ensure an overall match.

@example
(pregexp-match "<.*?>" "<tag1> <tag2> <tag3>")
@result{} ("<tag1>")
@end example

The non--greedy quantifiers are respectively: @code{*?}, @code{+?},
@code{??}, @code{@{m@}?}, @code{@{m,n@}?}.  Note the two uses of the
metacharacter @code{?}.

@c page
@node pregexp syntax clusters
@subsection Clusters


Clustering, i.e., enclosure within parens @code{(...)}, identifies the
enclosed subpattern as a single entity.  It causes the matcher to
capture the submatch, or the portion of the string matching the
subpattern, in addition to the overall match.

@example
(pregexp-match "([a-z]+) ([0-9]+), ([0-9]+)" "jan 1, 1970")
@result{} ("jan 1, 1970" "jan" "1" "1970")
@end example

Clustering also causes a following quantifier to treat the entire
enclosed subpattern as an entity.

@example
(pregexp-match "(poo )*" "poo poo platter")
@result{} ("poo poo " "poo ")
@end example

The number of submatches returned is always equal to the number of
subpatterns specified in the regexp, even if a particular subpattern
happens to match more than one substring or no substring at all.

@example
(pregexp-match "([a-z ]+;)*" "lather; rinse; repeat;")
@result{} ("lather; rinse; repeat;" " repeat;")
@end example

Here the @code{*}--quantified subpattern matches three times, but it is
the last submatch that is returned.

It is also possible for a quantified subpattern to fail to match, even
if the overall pattern matches.  In such cases, the failing submatch is
represented by @false{}.

@example
(define date-re
  ;match `month year' or `month day, year'.
  ;subpattern matches day, if present
  (pregexp "([a-z]+) +([0-9]+,)? *([0-9]+)"))

(pregexp-match date-re "jan 1, 1970")
@result{} ("jan 1, 1970" "jan" "1," "1970")

(pregexp-match date-re "jan 1970")
@result{} ("jan 1970" "jan" #f "1970")
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Backreferences

Submatches can be used in the insert string argument of the procedures
@func{pregexp-replace} and @func{pregexp-replace*}.  The insert string
can use @code{\n} as a backreference to refer back to the @math{n}-th
submatch, i.e., the substring that matched the @math{n}-th subpattern.
@code{\0} refers to the entire match, and it can also be specified as
@code{\&}.

@example
(pregexp-replace "_(.+?)_"
  "the _nina_, the _pinta_, and the _santa maria_"
  "*\\1*")
@result{} "the *nina*, the _pinta_, and the _santa maria_"

(pregexp-replace* "_(.+?)_"
  "the _nina_, the _pinta_, and the _santa maria_"
  "*\\1*")
@result{} "the *nina*, the *pinta*, and the *santa maria*"
@end example

@noindent
recall: @code{\S} stands for non--whitespace character:

@example
(pregexp-replace "(\\S+) (\\S+) (\\S+)"
  "eat to live"
  "\\3 \\2 \\1")
@result{} "live to eat"
@end example

Use @code{\\} in the insert string to specify a literal backslash.
Also, @code{\$} stands for an empty string, and is useful for separating
a backreference @code{\n} from an immediately following number.

Backreferences can also be used within the regexp pattern to refer back
to an already matched subpattern in the pattern.  @code{\n} stands for
an exact repeat of the @math{n}-th submatch.@footnote{@code{0}, which is
useful in an insert string, makes no sense within the regexp pattern,
because the entire regexp has not matched yet that you could refer back
to it.}

@example
(pregexp-match "([a-z]+) and \\1"
  "billions and billions")
@result{} ("billions and billions" "billions")
@end example

Note that the backreference is not simply a repeat of the previous
subpattern.  Rather it is a repeat of the particular substring already
matched by the subpattern.

In the above example, the backreference can only match billions.  It
will not match millions, even though the subpattern it harks back to
@code{([a-z]+)} would have had no problem doing so:

@example
(pregexp-match "([a-z]+) and \\1"
  "billions and millions")
@result{} #f
@end example

The following corrects doubled words:

@example
(pregexp-replace* "(\\S+) \\1"
  "now is the the time for all good men to to come to the aid of of the party"
  "\\1")
@result{} "now is the time for all good men to come to the aid of the party"
@end example

The following marks all immediately repeating patterns in a number
string:

@example
(pregexp-replace* "(\\d+)\\1"
  "123340983242432420980980234"
  "@{\\1,\\1@}")
@result{} "12@{3,3@}40983@{24,24@}3242@{098,098@}0234"
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Non--capturing clusters

It is often required to specify a cluster (typically for quantification)
but without triggering the capture of submatch information.  Such
clusters are called non--capturing.  In such cases, use @code{(?:}
instead of @code{(} as the cluster opener.  In the following example,
the non--capturing cluster eliminates the ``directory'' portion of a
given pathname, and the capturing cluster identifies the basename.

@example
(pregexp-match "^(?:[a-z]*/)*([a-z]+)$"
  "/usr/local/bin/mzscheme")
@result{} ("/usr/local/bin/mzscheme" "mzscheme")
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Cloisters

@cindex pregexp-comment-char

The location between the @code{?} and the @code{:} of a non--capturing
cluster is called a cloister.@footnote{A useful, if terminally cute,
coinage from the abbots of Perl.}  We can put modifiers there that will
cause the enclustered subpattern to be treated specially.  The modifier
@code{i} causes the subpattern to match case--insensitively:

@example
(pregexp-match "(?i:hearth)" "HeartH")
@result{} ("HeartH")
@end example

The modifier @code{x} causes the subpattern to match
space--insensitively, i.e., spaces and comments within the subpattern
are ignored.  Comments are introduced as usual with a semicolon
(@code{;}) and extend till the end of the line.  If we need to include a
literal space or semicolon in a space--insensitized subpattern, escape
it with a backslash.

@example
(pregexp-match "(?x: a   lot)" "alot")
@result{} ("alot")

(pregexp-match "(?x: a  \\  lot)" "a lot")
@result{} ("a lot")

(pregexp-match "(?x:
   a \\ man  \\; \\   ; ignore
   a \\ plan \\; \\   ; me
   a \\ canal         ; completely
   )"
 "a man; a plan; a canal")
@result{} ("a man; a plan; a canal")
@end example

The parameter @func{pregexp-comment-char} contains the comment character
(#\;).  For Perl--like comments,

@example
(parameterise ((pregexp-comment-char #\#))
   ---)
@end example

We can put more than one modifier in the cloister.

@example
(pregexp-match "(?ix:
   a \\ man  \\; \\   ; ignore
   a \\ plan \\; \\   ; me
   a \\ canal         ; completely
   )"
 "A Man; a Plan; a Canal")
@result{} ("A Man; a Plan; a Canal")
@end example

A minus sign before a modifier inverts its meaning.  Thus, we can use
@code{-i} and @code{-x} in a subcluster to overturn the insensitivities
caused by an enclosing cluster.

@example
(pregexp-match "(?i:the (?-i:TeX)book)"
  "The TeXbook")
@result{} ("The TeXbook")
@end example

This regexp will allow any casing for the and book but insists that TeX
not be differently cased.

@c page
@node pregexp syntax alternation
@subsection Alternation


You can specify a list of alternate subpatterns by separating them by
@code{|}.  The @code{|} separates subpatterns in the nearest enclosing
cluster (or in the entire pattern string if there are no enclosing
parens).

@example
(pregexp-match "f(ee|i|o|um)" "a small, final fee")
@result{} ("fi" "i")

(pregexp-replace* "([yi])s(e[sdr]?|ing|ation)"
   "it is energising to analyse an organisation
   pulsing with noisy organisms"
   "\\1z\\2")
@result{} "it is energizing to analyze an organization
   pulsing with noisy organisms"
@end example

Note again that if we wish to use clustering merely to specify a list of
alternate subpatterns but do not want the submatch, use @code{(?:}
instead of @code{(}.

@example
(pregexp-match "f(?:ee|i|o|um)" "fun for all")
@result{} ("fo")
@end example

An important thing to note about alternation is that the leftmost
matching alternate is picked regardless of its length.  Thus, if one of
the alternates is a prefix of a later alternate, the latter may not have
a chance to match.

@example
(pregexp-match "call|call-with-current-continuation"
  "call-with-current-continuation")
@result{} ("call")
@end example

To allow the longer alternate to have a shot at matching, place it
before the shorter one:

@example
(pregexp-match "call-with-current-continuation|call"
  "call-with-current-continuation")
@result{} ("call-with-current-continuation")
@end example

In any case, an overall match for the entire regexp is always preferred
to an overall nonmatch.  In the following, the longer alternate still
wins, because its preferred shorter prefix fails to yield an overall
match.

@example
(pregexp-match "(?:call|call-with-current-continuation) constrained"
  "call-with-current-continuation constrained")
@result{} ("call-with-current-continuation constrained")
@end example

@c page
@node pregexp syntax backtrack
@subsection Backtracking


We've already seen that greedy quantifiers match the maximal number of
times, but the overriding priority is that the overall match
succeed.  Consider:

@example
(pregexp-match "a*a" "aaaa")
@end example

The regexp consists of two subregexps, @code{a*} followed by @code{a}.
The subregexp @code{a*} cannot be allowed to match all four @code{a}'s
in the text string @code{aaaa}, even though @code{*} is a greedy
quantifier.  It may match only the first three, leaving the last one for
the second subregexp.  This ensures that the full regexp matches
successfully.

The regexp matcher accomplishes this via a process called backtracking.
The matcher tentatively allows the greedy quantifier to match all four
@code{a}'s, but then when it becomes clear that the overall match is in
jeopardy, it backtracks to a less greedy match of three @code{a}'s.  If
even this fails, as in the call:

@example
(pregexp-match "a*aa" "aaaa")
@end example

@noindent
the matcher backtracks even further.  Overall failure is conceded only
when all possible backtracking has been tried with no success.

Backtracking is not restricted to greedy quantifiers.  Nongreedy
quantifiers match as few instances as possible, and progressively
backtrack to more and more instances in order to attain an overall
match.  There is backtracking in alternation too, as the more rightward
alternates are tried when locally successful leftward ones fail to yield
an overall match.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Disabling backtracking

Sometimes it is efficient to disable backtracking.  For example, we may
wish to commit to a choice, or we know that trying alternatives is
fruitless.  A nonbacktracking regexp is enclosed in @code{(?>...)}.

@example
(pregexp-match "(?>a+)." "aaaa")
@result{} #f
@end example

In this call, the subregexp @code{?>a+} greedily matches all four
@code{a}'s, and is denied the opportunity to backpedal.  So the overall
match is denied.  The effect of the regexp is therefore to match one or
more @code{a}'s followed by something that is definitely non--@code{a}.

@c page
@node pregexp syntax look
@subsection Looking ahead and behind


We can have assertions in our pattern that look ahead or behind to
ensure that a subpattern does or does not occur.  These ``look around''
assertions are specified by putting the subpattern checked for in a
cluster whose leading characters are:

@table @code
@item ?=
Positive lookahead.

@item ?!
Negative lookahead.

@item ?<=
Positive lookbehind.

@item ?<!
Negative lookbehind.
@end table

Note that the subpattern in the assertion does not generate a match in
the final result.  It merely allows or disallows the rest of the match.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Lookahead

Positive lookahead (@code{?=}) peeks ahead to ensure that its subpattern
could match.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "grey(?=hound)"
  "i left my grey socks at the greyhound")
@result{} ((28 . 32))
@end example

The regexp @code{grey(?=hound)} matches grey, but only if it is followed
by hound.  Thus, the first grey in the text string is not matched.

Negative lookahead (@code{?!}) peeks ahead to ensure that its subpattern
could not possibly match.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "grey(?!hound)"
  "the gray greyhound ate the grey socks")
@result{} ((27 . 31))
@end example

The regexp @code{grey(?!hound)} matches @code{grey}, but only if it is
not followed by @code{hound}.  Thus the @code{grey} just before
@code{socks} is matched.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Lookbehind

Positive lookbehind (@code{?<=}) checks that its subpattern could match
immediately to the left of the current position in the text string.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "(?<=grey)hound"
  "the hound in the picture is not a greyhound")
@result{} ((38 . 43))
@end example

The regexp @code{(?<=grey)hound} matches hound, but only if it is
preceded by grey.

Negative lookbehind (@code{?<!}) checks that its subpattern could not
possibly match immediately to the left.

@example
(pregexp-match-positions "(?<!grey)hound"
  "the greyhound in the picture is not a hound")
@result{} ((38 . 43))
@end example

The regexp @code{(?<!grey)hound} matches @code{hound}, but only if it is
not preceded by @code{grey}.

Lookaheads and lookbehinds can be convenient when they are not
confusing.

@c page
@node pregexp example
@section An extended example


Here's an extended example@footnote{From: Jeffrey E. F. Friedl,
Mastering Regular Expressions, 2/e, O'Reilly, 2002.}  that covers many
of the features in @library{pregexp}.  The problem is to fashion a
regexp that will match any and only @ip{} addresses or dotted quads,
i.e., four numbers separated by three dots, with each number between
@math{0} and @math{255}.  We will use the commenting mechanism to build
the final regexp with clarity.  First, a subregexp @code{n0-255} that
matches @code{0} through @code{255}.

@example
(define n0-255
  "(?x:
  \\d          ;  0 through   9
  | \\d\\d     ; 00 through  99
  | [01]\\d\\d ;000 through 199
  | 2[0-4]\\d  ;200 through 249
  | 25[0-5]    ;250 through 255
  )")
@end example

The first two alternates simply get all single- and double--digit
numbers.  Since zero--padding is allowed, we need to match both @code{1}
and @code{01}.  We need to be careful when getting @math{3}--digit
numbers, since numbers above @math{255} must be excluded.  So we fashion
alternates to get @code{000} through @code{199}, then @code{200} through
@code{249}, and finally @code{250} through @code{255}.@footnote{Note
that @code{n0-255} lists prefixes as preferred alternates, something we
cautioned against.  However, since we intend to anchor this subregexp
explicitly to force an overall match, the order of the alternates does
not matter.}

An @ip{}--address is a string that consists of four @code{n0-255}s with
three dots separating them.

@example
(define ip-re1
  (string-append
    "^"        ;nothing before
    n0-255     ;the first n0-255,
    "(?x:"     ;then the subpattern of
    "\\."      ;a dot followed by
    n0-255     ;an n0-255,
    ")"        ;which is
    "@{3@}"      ;repeated exactly 3 times
    "$"        ;with nothing following
    ))
@end example

Let's try it out.

@example
(pregexp-match ip-re1
  "1.2.3.4")
@result{} ("1.2.3.4")

(pregexp-match ip-re1
  "55.155.255.265")
@result{} #f
@end example

@noindent
which is fine, except that we also have:

@example
(pregexp-match ip-re1
  "0.00.000.00")
@result{} ("0.00.000.00")
@end example

All--zero sequences are not valid @ip{} addresses!  Lookahead to the
rescue.  Before starting to match @code{ip-re1}, we look ahead to ensure
we don't have all zeros.  We could use positive lookahead to ensure
there is a digit other than zero.

@example
(define ip-re
  (string-append
    "(?=.*[1-9])" ;ensure there's a non-0 digit
    ip-re1))
@end example

Or we could use negative lookahead to ensure that what's ahead isn't
composed of only zeros and dots.

@example
(define ip-re
  (string-append
    "(?![0.]*$)" ;not just zeros and dots
                 ;(note: dot is not metachar inside [])
    ip-re1))
@end example

The regexp @code{ip-re} will match all and only valid @ip{} addresses.

@example
(pregexp-match ip-re
  "1.2.3.4")
@result{} ("1.2.3.4")

(pregexp-match ip-re
  "0.0.0.0")
@result{} #f
@end example

@c page
@node parser-tools
@chapter Lexer and parser utilities


A set of libraries provides basic tools to implement lexers, parsers and
the interface between them.  These tools are meant to be used by all the
lexers and parsers distributed with @value{PACKAGE}.

@menu
* parser-tools location::       Source location records.
* parser-tools token::          Lexical token records.
@end menu

@c page
@node parser-tools location
@section Source location records


Location records are meant to store informations about the position of a
token in the input stream; they should be produced by the lexer and
either discarded or consumed by the parser's error handler.  All the
bindings are exported by the @library{parser-tools source-location}
library.

It is cleaner to implement the parser in such a way that location
records are used only by client--supplied error handlers, not by the
parser itself.  The parser should handle the location as an opaque
value, possibly @false{} when there is no consistent way to track the
source location.

@menu
* parser-tools location type::          The record type.
* parser-tools location makers::        Building records.
* parser-tools location pred::          Predicates.
* parser-tools location cmp::           Comparison functions.
* parser-tools location update::        Updating the location.
* parser-tools location misc::          Miscellaneous functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node parser-tools location type
@subsection Type, makers, accessors


@deffn {Record Type} <source-location>
References the position of the next character to parse in the input
stream, which is the position of the first char in the next token
produced by the lexer.  All the fields in a @class{source-location}
record are immutable; they are:

@table @samp
@item input
Describes the source of the input.  It can be any Scheme value, for
example a string representing the pathname of an input file.  Set to
@false{} if the source is unknown.

@item line
@itemx column
@itemx offset
Counters for the line number, column number and character offset from
the start of the input.  By convention: Line and column numbers start
from @math{1}, the offset starts from @math{0}.

When the value of these counters is not known, by convention, they
should be set to @false{}, so that they are no more numbers.

Notice that these values match the local bindings @samp{yyline},
@samp{yycolumn} and @samp{yyoffset} available to the lexer actions of
the @library{silex} library.  @ref{silex semantics action, Evaluation of
the actions}
@end table
@end deffn


@defun <source-location>-input @var{loc}
@defunx <source-location>-line @var{loc}
@defunx <source-location>-column @var{loc}
@defunx <source-location>-offset @var{loc}
Accessors for the fields of a @class{source-location} record.
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools location makers
@subsection Building records


@defun make-<source-location> @var{input} @var{line} @var{colum} @var{offset}
Build and return a record of type @class{source-location}.
@end defun


@defun make-<source-location>/start @var{input-spec}
Build and return @class{source-location} representing the very beginning
of an input stream.  The line and column counters are set to @math{1},
the offset counter is set to @math{0}; @var{input-spec} is stored in the
@samp{input} field.
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools location pred
@subsection Predicates


@defun <source-location>? @var{obj}
@defunx <source-location>?/or-false @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{source-location}.
The second variant accepts @false{}, too.
@end defun


@defun <source-location>?/start @var{obj}
@defunx <source-location>?/start/or-false @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{source-location} and
it represents the first possible location: Column and line counters set
to @math{1}.  The offset counter is ignored.  The second variant accepts
@false{}, too.
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools location cmp
@subsection Comparison functions


@defun source-location=? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Compare @vari{loc} and @varii{loc} which must be @false{} or records of
type @class{source-location}.  Return true if @vari{loc} and @varii{loc}
are non--false and the line, column and offset counters have the same
values.
@end defun


The following comparison functions establish an ordering in the space of
the @class{source-location} records and @false{} by comparing the line
and column counters.  By convention:

@itemize
@item
A @class{source-location} record is more advanced than @false{} in the
input stream.

@item
When the arguments of a comparision function application are both
@false{}, the result is @false{}.
@end itemize


@defun source-location-point=? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if the line and column counters of @vari{loc} and
@varii{loc} have the same values.
@end defun


@defun source-location-point>? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if @vari{loc} is more advanced in the input stream than
@varii{loc}.
@end defun


@defun source-location-point>=? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if @vari{loc} is more advanced or at the same point, in
the input stream than @varii{loc}.
@end defun


@defun source-location-point<? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if @vari{loc} is less advanced in the input stream than
@varii{loc}.
@end defun


@defun source-location-point<=? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if @vari{loc} is less advanced or at the same point, in
the input stream than @varii{loc}.
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools location update
@subsection Updating the location


@defun source-location-update @var{location} @var{char/token-length}
If @var{location} is @false{}, the return value is @false{}.  If
@var{location} is a @class{source-location} record, build and return a
new @class{source-location} record representing the position of the next
char to be parsed in the input stream, starting from @var{location} and
updated with @var{char/token-length}.

@itemize
@item
If @var{char/token-length} is an exact integer, it is interpreted as
token length.  The column and offset counters from @var{location} are
incremented by that amount.

@item
If @var{char/token-length} is the @samp{#\return} character the action
depends upon the value of the @samp{source-location-honor-return}
parameter: if it is true, the column counter is set to @math{1} and the
offset counter is incremented by @math{1}; if it is @false{}, the column
and offset counters are incremented by @math{1}.

@item
If @var{char/token-length} is the @samp{#\newline} character: The line
counter is incremented by @math{1}, the column counter is set to
@math{1} and the offset counter is incremented by @math{1}.

@item
If @var{char/token-length} is the @samp{#\tab} character: The offset
counter is incremented by @math{1} and the column counter is set to the
result of:

@example
((source-location-tab-function)
    (<source-location>-column @var{location}))
@end example

@noindent
that is, the current procedure in the
@samp{source-location-tab-function} parameter is applied to the column
counter to produce the next column counter's value.
@end itemize
@end defun


@deffn Parameter source-location-tab-function
Hold a function used to produce the next column counter's value given
the current column counter.  By default it is set to
@func{source-location-tab-function/8chars}.
@end deffn


@defun source-location-tab-function/8chars @var{column}
Return the smallest multiple of @math{8} which is greater than
@var{column}.
@end defun


@defun source-location-tab-function/tab-table @var{column}
Produce the next column counter's value drawing it from the list of
horizontal tabulation offsets in the @samp{source-location-tab-table}
parameter.  The returned value is the smallest offset which is greater
than @var{column}.  If the list is null or all the offsets are smaller
than @var{column}, @func{source-location-tab-function/8chars} is used to
compute the return value.
@end defun


@deffn Parameter source-location-tab-table
Hold a list of horizontal tabulation offsets, sorted in increasing
order.  The default value is null.
@end deffn


@deffn Parameter source-location-honor-return
Hold a boolean value which causes @func{source-location-update} to honor
a @samp{#\return} character or not.
@end deffn

@c page
@node parser-tools location misc
@subsection Miscellaneous functions


The procedures described here make use of the @library{nos} library.
@ref{nos, Nausicaa Object System}


@defun source-location->string @var{loc}
Return a string representation of @var{loc}, which must be a record of
type @class{source-location} or @false{}.  If @var{loc} is @false{}, the
return value is the string @samp{<??>}; else the result is of the form:

@example
<input>:line:column
@end example

@noindent
for example @samp{main.c:33:7}.  @meta{input} is a string produced by
applying @func{object->string} to the value of the @samp{input} field of
@var{loc}.

Notice that the use of this function is not mandatory at all.
@end defun


@deffn {NOS Method} object->string (@var{o} <source-location>)
Return a string representation of @var{o}.  It is a wrapper for
@func{source-location->string}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node parser-tools token
@section Lexical token records


Lexical token records are meant to store informations about a token from
the input stream; they should be produced by the lexer and consumed by
the parser.  The following bindings are exported by the
@library{parser-tools lexical-token} library.

@menu
* parser-tools token type::     The record type.
* parser-tools token maker::    Record makers.
* parser-tools token pred::     Predicates.
@end menu

@c page
@node parser-tools token type
@subsection The record type


@deftp {Record Type} <lexical-token>
Hold the informations about a token from the input stream.  All the
fields in a @class{lexical-token} record are immutable.  Fields
description follows.

@table @samp
@item category
Represents the grammar's terminal symbol to which this token belongs.
Every parser @api{} must provide an interface to specify the list of
allowed terminal symbols.

@item location
Represents the location in the input from which the token was built; it
must be @false{} or an instance of @class{source-location} record.

@item value
Represents the semantic value associated with the token.  It can be any
Scheme value.

@item length
It is meant to be the length of the string which generated the token.
When the token represents the end--of--input, this field can be set to
zero.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun <lexical-token>-category @var{tok}
@defunx <lexical-token>-source @var{tok}
@defunx <lexical-token>-location @var{tok}
@defunx <lexical-token>-length @var{tok}
Accessors for the fields of @class{lexical-token} records.
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools token maker
@subsection Record makers


For example, when the lexer tokenises the number @math{123} from the
string @samp{123}, it can build a record with:

@example
(let ((position ---))
  (make-<lexical-token> 'NUMBER position 123 3))
@end example

@noindent
while when tokenising a string it can do:

@example
(let ((position ---))
  (make-<lexical-token> 'STRING position "some text" 9))
@end example

When the lexer has to signal the end--of--input, it must return a token
with category @samp{*eoi*}, and continue to return it if it is called
again and again; it can do:

@example
(let ((position ---))
  (make-lexical-token '*eoi* position (eof-object)))
@end example

When the lexer closure has to signal a lexer error (an invalid character
from the input stream), it must return a token with category
@samp{*lexer-error*}.


@defun make-<lexical-token> @var{category} @var{location} @var{value} @var{length}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexical-token}.
@end defun


@defun make-<lexical-token>/end-of-input @var{location}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexical-token} meant to
represent the end--of--input.  The field @samp{category} is set to the
symbol @samp{*eoi*}, the field @samp{value} is set to
@samp{(eof-object)}, the field @samp{length} is set to zero.  The field
@samp{location} is set to @var{location}, which must be a
@class{source-location} record or @false{}.
@end defun


@defun make-<lexical-token>/lexer-error @var{location} @var{value} @var{length}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexical-token} meant to
represent a lexer error.  The field @samp{category} is set to
@samp{*lexer-error*}, all the other fields are initialised with the
arguments.
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools token pred
@subsection Predicates


@defun <lexical-token>? @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is an instance of @class{lexical-token}.
@end defun


@defun <lexical-token>?/end-of-input @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is an instance of @class{lexical-token} having
category @func{eq?} to the symbol @samp{*eoi*}.
@end defun


@defun <lexical-token>?/lexer-error @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is an instance of @class{lexical-token} having
category @func{eq?} to the symbol @samp{*lexer-error*}.
@end defun


@defun <lexical-token>?/special @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is an instance of @class{lexical-token} having
category @func{eq?} to the symbol @samp{*eoi*} or @samp{*lexer-error*}.
@end defun

@c page
@node silex
@chapter A lexical analyser generator


The @library{silex} library generates a lexical analyser table from a
Lex--like specification file.  The @library{silex lexer} library
generates a Scheme lexical analyser using a supplied table.

``SILex'' stands for ``Scheme Implementation of Lex''.  The library is a
port to @rnrs{6} Scheme of SILex version 1.0 by Danny Dube'.  The
original code is available at@footnote{@aurl{} last verified Mon Aug 3,
2009}:

@center @url{http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~dube/}

@menu
* silex example::               A lexer example for a calculator.
* silex tables::                Creating lexer tables.
* silex input::                 Input systems.
* silex lexer::                 Building and using lexical analysers.
* silex syntax::                Syntax of the specification.
* silex semantics::             Semantics of the specification file.
* silex format::                Tables output format.
@end menu

@c page
@node silex example
@section A lexer example for a calculator


The following is a lexer specification file that can be used to tokenise
a mathematical expression.

@smallexample
blanks          [ \9\10\13]+

decint          [0-9]+
binint          #[bB][01]+
octint          #[oO][0-7]+
hexint          #[xX][0-9A-Fa-f]+
integer         @{decint@}|@{binint@}|@{octint@}|@{hexint@}

exponent        ([eE][+\-]?[0-9]+)
truereal        [0-9]+\.|[0-9]*\.[0-9]+@{exponent@}?|[0-9]+@{exponent@}
real            @{truereal@}|@{integer@}

imag            (@{decint@}|@{real@})i

nan             \-nan\.0|\+nan\.0|nan\.0
pinf            \+inf\.0|inf\.0
minf            \-inf\.0

initial         [a-zA-Z_]
subsequent      @{initial@}|[0-9\.@!$&:<=>?~\-]
symbol          @{initial@}@{subsequent@}*

operator        <=|>=|//|[\+\-*/%\^<>=]

comma           ,

oparen          \(
cparen          \)

%%
@{blanks@}        ;; skip blanks, tabs and newlines
@{imag@}          (string->number (string-append "+" yytext))
@{real@}          (string->number yytext)
@{nan@}           +nan.0
@{pinf@}          +inf.0
@{minf@}          -inf.0
@{operator@}      (case (string->symbol yytext)
                    ((+) '+)
                    ((-) '-)
                    ((*) '*)
                    ((/) '/)
                    ((%) 'mod)
                    ((^) 'expt)
                    ((//) 'div)
                    ((=) '=)
                    ((<) '<)
                    ((>) '>)
                    ((<=) '<=)
                    ((>=) '>=))
@{symbol@}        (string->symbol yytext)
@{comma@}         'cons

@{oparen@}        #\(
@{cparen@}        #\)

<<EOF>>         (eof-object)
<<ERROR>>       (assertion-violation #f
                  "invalid lexer token")
@end smallexample

Let's say the file is called @file{calc.l}, then the table for this
lexer can be created with one of the following forms (and other forms
not described here):

@example
;; Generate a proper Scheme library called "(calc)" and
;; save it in the file "calc-lib.sls".
;;
;; Use the default table format.
;;
;; The library exports the table bound to "calc-table".

(lex :input-file "calc.l" :output-file "calc-lib.sls"
     :library-spec "(calc)"
     :table-name 'calc-table)


;; Generate a DEFINE form in that binds the lexer table
;; to the symbol "calc-table" and save it in the file
;; "calc-def.sls".
;;
;; Use the Scheme code table format.

(lex :input-file "calc.l" :output-file "calc-def.sls"
     :lexer-format 'code
     :table-name 'calc-table)

;; Generate the lexer table, evaluate it and return it
;; as value immediately usable.
;;
;; Use the Scheme code table format.

(define calc-table
  (lex :input-file "calc.l" :output-value #t
       :lexer-format 'code))
@end example

Once we have created the lexer table, let's say bound to
@samp{calc-table}, we can use it as follows.  We take advantage of the
fact that: When the input reaches the end, the lexer closure returns the
@samp{(eof-object)} value.

@example
(define (tokenize table string)
  (let* ((IS    (lexer-make-IS :string string))
         (lexer (lexer-make-lexer table IS))
    (do ((token (lexer) (lexer))
         (out   '()))
        ((eof-object? token)
         (reverse out))
      (set! out (cons token out))))))

(tokenize calc-table "1*(2/3)")
@result{} (1 * #\( 2 / 3 #\))

(tokenize calc-table "fun(1+a, sin(2), 3, 4)")
@result{} (fun #\( 1 + a cons sin #\( 2 #\) cons 3 cons 4 #\))
@end example

@c page
@node silex tables
@section Creating lexer tables


The following bindings, keywords included, are exported by the
@library{silex} library.


@defun lex @var{keyword} @var{value} ...
Build a new lexer table from a lexer specification.  @ref{silex syntax,
Syntax of the specification}

The behaviour of this function is configured with the
@var{keyword}/@var{value} couples used as arguments.  The options must
be in couples whose first value is a proper keyword, see below for the
list of supported options.  @ref{keywords, Keyword values}

The specification can be loaded from a file, or read from a textual
input port, or acquired from a Scheme string.

The output is the lexer's @dfn{table}, a Scheme vector representing the
lexer automaton.  It can be saved to a file, or written to a port, or
evaluated using the @library{rnrs eval} library and returned as value.
@end defun


@deffn Option :input-string @var{spec-str}
Instruct @func{lex} to build the lexer tables from the specification in
the given Scheme string.  When used together, this option supersedes
@samp{:input-file} and @samp{:input-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :input-port @var{port}
Instruct @func{lex} to build the lexer tables from the specification
read from the given textual input port.  When used together, this option
supersedes @samp{:input-file}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :input-file @var{pathname}
Instruct @func{lex} to build the lexer tables from the specification in
the selected file.  @var{pathname} must be a string representing an
existent file pathname.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :library-spec @var{library-name}
Instruct @func{lex} to build the output as a proper Scheme library.
This means a Scheme string is built, representing a @func{library} form.
The string may contain Scheme comments.  When this option is not used
the output is the raw table vector or a @func{define} form.

The argument @var{library-name} must represent a valid library name; the
following formats are accepted:

@itemize
@item
A string, including the parentheses.  Example:

@example
:library-spec "(calc-lexer)"
; -> (library (calc-lexer) ---)
@end example

@item
A symbol, which will be converted to string and to which parentheses
will be added.  Example:

@example
:library-spec 'calc-lexer
; -> (library (calc-lexer) ---)
@end example

@item
A list of values, which will be simply converted to string.  Example:

@example
:library-spec '(calc-lexer)
; -> (library (calc-lexer) ---)
@end example
@end itemize

It is mandatory to use the option @samp{:table-name} along with
@samp{:library-spec}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :library-imports @var{import-list}
Select a list of libraries which must be imported when using the
generated lexer.  @var{import-list} must be a list of library
specifications; for example, if we want to include the
@library{sentinel} and @library{parameters} libraries we do:

@example
:library-imports '((sentinel) (parameters))
@end example

If the lexer table is written to a proper Scheme library:
@var{import-list} is added to the import specification of the generated
library.  If the lexer table is directly evaluated: @var{import-list} is
added to the environment which is handed to @func{eval}.

This option is ignored when the selected output is neither a library,
nor an evaluated library.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :table-name @var{name}
Instruct @func{lex} to output a @func{define} form defining a binding
between @var{name} and the table vector.  @var{name} can be a string or
symbol, and it must represent a valid identifier.

When this option is used along with @samp{:library-spec}, the
@func{library} form will export the identifier @var{name}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :output-value #t|#f
When the argument is @true{}, instruct @func{lex} to evaluate the vector
table using the @library{rnrs eval} library and to return the result,
which is then directly usable.

The list of libraries selected by @samp{:library-imports} is added to
the environment used for the evaluation.  By default, the environment
always includes @library{rnrs}, and also @library{silex lexer} when the
selected lexer format is @samp{code}.

It is an error to use this option along with @samp{:table-name}.  When
used together, this option supersedes @samp{:output-file} and
@samp{:output-port}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :output-port @var{port}
Instruct @func{lex} to write the output as string in the given textual
output port.

When used together, this option supersedes @samp{:output-file}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :output-file @var{pathname}
Instruct @func{lex} to save the output in a file with given pathname.
This is especially useful when the output is a proper @func{library} or
@func{define} form.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :lexer-format @var{format}
Instruct @func{lex} about the format of the lexer table.  @var{format}
can be one among the following symbols: @samp{decision-tree},
@samp{code}, @samp{portable}; the default is @samp{decision-tree}.
@ref{silex format, Tables output format}
@end deffn


@deffn Option :pretty-print #t|#f
Instruct @func{lex} to pretty--print the contents of the table.
Normally, the table is displayed as a compact mass of characters fitting
in about @math{75} columns.  The option is useful only for a developer
of @library{silex}.  The Scheme code generated with the @samp{code}
option is always pretty--printed, the others are not by default.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :counters @var{which-ones}
Instruct @func{lex} about which counters will be available to the lexer.

Counters are managed by the input system, and can be used by the lexer.
The following values for @var{which-ones} are available: @samp{all},
@samp{line}, @samp{none}; @samp{line} is the default.  The more counters
the input system maintains, the more it is slowed down.

Notice that the same @samp{:counters} option must be given to @func{lex}
and to @func{lexer-make-IS}, a mismatch will result in undefined
behaviour.  This is because an input system is independent from a lexer
table, and it is more efficient to build tables for a specific set of
counters rather than to configure them at run time.
@end deffn

@c page
@node silex input
@section Input systems


An input system provides the buffering, the line counting and similar
low level services.  The following bindings, including keywords, are
exported by the @library{silex lexer} library.


@defun lexer-make-IS @var{keyword} @var{value} ...
Build and return a new input system.  The behaviour of this function is
configured with the @var{keyword}/@var{value} couples used as arguments.
See below for the list of supported options.  @ref{keywords, Keyword
values}

Input characters can come from a string, a port or the return value of a
procedure.  When an input port is used by an input system, the program
should avoid reading characters directly from the port.  This is because
the input system may have needed a look--ahead to do the analysis of the
preceding token.  The program would not find what it expects on the
port.  The input system provides safe functions to get characters from
the input.
@end defun


@deffn Option :string @var{string}
Instruct @func{lexer-make-IS} to build an input system that will take
characters from the supplied string.  When the input system is
initialized with a string, it takes a copy of it.  This way, eventual
mutations of the string do not affect the analysis.

When used together, this option supersedes @samp{:port} and
@samp{:procedure}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :port @var{port}
Instruct @func{lexer-make-IS} to build an input system that will read
characters from the supplied textual input port.  The input system never
closes itself the port it has received, this task is left to the
program.

When used together, this option supersedes @samp{:procedure}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :procedure @var{proc}
Instruct @func{lexer-make-IS} to build an input system that will read
characters invoking the supplied procedure.

The use of a function as character source allows the input system to
parse any character stream, no matter how it is obtained.  For example,
the characters may come from the decompression or decryption of a huge
file, the task being done lazily in order to save space.

The function must take no argument and return a character each time it
is called.  When the end of file (or its logical equivalent) is reached,
the function must return an object that is not a character (for example,
the symbol @samp{eof}).  After the function has returned an end of file
indicator, it is not called again.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :counters @var{which-ones}
Instruct @func{lexer-make-IS} about which counters to make available to
the lexer.

Counters are managed by the input system, and can be used by the lexer.
The following values for @var{which-ones} are available: @samp{all},
@samp{line}, @samp{none}; @samp{line} is the default.  The more counters
the input system maintains, the more it is slowed down.

Notice that the same @samp{:counters} option must be given to @func{lex}
and to @func{lexer-make-IS}, a mismatch will result in undefined
behaviour.  This is because an input system is independent from a lexer
table, and it is more efficient to build tables for a specific set of
counters rather than to configure them at run time.
@end deffn


@defun lexer-get-func-line @var{input-system}
Return a closure which, when invoked with no arguments, will return the
current line number in @var{input-system}.
@end defun


@defun lexer-get-func-column @var{input-system}
Return a closure which, when invoked with no arguments, will return the
current column number in @var{input-system}.
@end defun


@defun lexer-get-func-offset @var{input-system}
Return a closure which, when invoked with no arguments, will return the
current offset in @var{input-system}.
@end defun


@defun lexer-get-func-getc @var{input-system}
Return a closure which, when invoked with no arguments, will return the
next character from @var{input-system}.  The closure allows client code
to perform a lookahead.

The returned character is not forgotten by the lexer, this function just
increments by @math{1} a pointer into the internal buffer.  Multiple
invocations of this function will return the sequence of characters
about to be analysed by the lexer.  When there are no more characters,
the return value is the @samp{(eof-object)} value.

The returned characters are @strong{skipped} by the lexer, unless we put
them back with the closure returned by @func{lexer-get-func-ungetc}.
@end defun


@defun lexer-get-func-ungetc @var{input-system}
Return a closure which, when invoked with no arguments, will decrement a
pointer into the buffer of @var{input-system}.  This function puts back
a character previously read by a closure returned by
@func{lexer-get-func-getc}.

It is not possible to replace characters in the input system.
@end defun

@c page
@node silex lexer
@section Building and using lexical analysers


Each lexer is associated to a lexer table and an input system.  Any
number of lexers, using any table, can be created using the same input
system.  Multiple lexers sharing the same input system can be invoked in
turn to parse complex inputs.  The following bindings are exported from
the @library{silex lexer} library.


@defun lexer-make-lexer @var{lexer-table} @var{input-system}
Build and return a new lexical analyser: an analysis function which,
when invoked with no arguments, returns the next token.
@var{lexer-table} must be a table generated by @func{lex}.
@var{input-system} is the input system from which the analyser will take
its input.
@end defun

@c page
@node silex syntax
@section Syntax of the specification


A specification for a lexical analyser contains two parts: the
@dfn{macro definitions part} and the @dfn{rules part}.  The two parts
are separated by the mark @code{%%}.  Example:

@example
blanks          [ \9\10\13]+
decint          [0-9]+

%%

@{blanks@}        ;; skip blanks, tabs and newlines
@{decint@}        (string->number yytext)
@end example

The first part is used to define @dfn{macros}; that is, to give names to
some regular expressions.  The second part is used to indicate the
regular expressions with which the input will have to match, and the
@dfn{actions} associated with each expression.

Comments can be inserted any place where white space is allowed and is
considered as white space itself.  Comments begin with a semicolon
@samp{;} and extend up to the end of a line.  The semicolon is a valid
token in many languages, so we should take care not to comment out an
entire line when writing a regular expression matching a semicolon.

@menu
* silex syntax macros::         Syntax of the macro definitions.
* silex syntax rules::          Syntax of the rule--action pairs.
* silex syntax regexp atomic::  Atomic regular expressions.
* silex syntax regexp compose:: Composing regular expressions.
* silex syntax regexp marker::  Markers.
* silex syntax regexp space::   White spaces in regular expressions.
* silex syntax sample::         Show some frequent mistakes.
@end menu

@c page
@node silex syntax macros
@subsection Macro definitions part


The first part of a specification contains zero or more macro
definitions.  A definition consists of a name and a regular expression,
separated by white space.  It looks better when each definition is
written on a separate line.

The syntax for a macro name is that of a Scheme symbol.  The case of the
letters is not significant.  For example, @code{abcd}, @code{+},
@code{...}, @code{Digit} and @code{digit} are all valid macro names; the
last two being the same.  We cannot write two macro definitions with the
same name.

The defined macro can be referenced in regular expressions using the
syntax @code{@{@var{name}@}}.  The scope of a macro definition includes
the remaining definitions and the rules part.  It is analogous to the
@code{let*} is Scheme, where the macro definitions correspond to the
bindings and the rules part correspond to the body.

We end the macro definitions part with @code{%%}.

@c page
@node silex syntax rules
@subsection Rules part


The rules part contains the rules up to the end of the specification.
Each rule is a @dfn{pattern} optionally followed by an @dfn{action}.
The pattern is a regular expression.  The action, if there is one, is
formed of one or more Scheme expressions.

The actions can span over several lines.  To distinguish between the
remaining of the current action and the start of a new rule, SILex
checks the indentation.  A new rule must start at the beginning of the
line.  That is, the action starts right after the pattern and contains
all the following lines that start with white space.

SILex does not parse the actions.  It simply captures the text
up to the start of the next rule.  So a syntax error in an action is not
detected by SILex.

Nevertheless, SILex is able to detect that an action has been omitted.
In that case, a default action is supplied.

@c page
@node silex syntax regexp atomic
@subsection Atomic regular expressions


The following constructs are regular expressions:

@table @code
@item c
@dfn{Ordinary character}.  It is a regular expression that matches the
character @var{c} itself.  @var{c} must @strong{not} be one of the
following characters:

@example
. \ @{ " [ | ? + * ( ) ^ $ ;
@end example

@noindent
or any white space.

@item .
@dfn{Wild card}.  It matches any character except the newline character.

@item \n
@itemx \@var{integer}
@itemx \@var{c}
@dfn{Backslash}.  The backslash is used for two things: protect a
character from special meaning; generating non-printable characters.

The expression @code{\n} matches the newline character.

The expression @code{\@var{integer}} matches the character that has
number @var{integer} (in the sense of @func{char->integer}).
@var{integer} must be a valid character number on the underlying Scheme
implementation.  Notice that @samp{\9} represents the horizontal
tabulation @samp{#\tab}, @samp{\10} the newline character
@samp{#\newline}, and @samp{\13} the carriage return character
@samp{#\return}.

The expression @code{\@var{c}} matches the character @var{c} if @var{c}
is not @samp{n}, @samp{-} nor a digit.

@item @{@var{name}@}
@dfn{Macro reference}.  This expression matches the same lexemes as
those matched by the regular expression named @var{name}.  We can
imagine that the reference is replaced by the text of the named
expression.  However, it works as if parentheses had been added to
protect the substituting expression.

@item "@var{some text}"
@dfn{String}.  A string matches a lexeme identical to its contents.  In
a string, the only special characters are @samp{"}, which closes the
string, and @samp{\} which keeps the effect mentioned above.

@item [@var{list of characters}]
@itemx []@var{list of characters}]
@itemx [-@var{list of characters}]
@itemx [^@var{list of characters}]
@dfn{Character class}.  The expression matches one of the enumerated
characters.  For example, the expression @samp{[abc]} matches one of
@samp{a}, @samp{b} and @samp{c}.

We can list a range of characters by writing the first character, the
@samp{-} and the last character.  For example, @samp{[A-Za-z]} matches
one letter.

The special characters in a class are @samp{]}, which closes the class,
@samp{-}, which denotes a range of characters, and @samp{\}, which keeps
its usual meaning.

There is an exception with the first character in a class.  If the first
character is @samp{]} or @samp{-}, it loses its special meaning.  If the
first character is @samp{^}, the expression matches one character if it
is @strong{not} enumerated in @var{list of characters}.
@end table

@c page
@node silex syntax regexp compose
@subsection Composing regular expressions


Suppose @var{r} and @var{s} are regular expressions.  Then the following
expressions can be built:

@table @code
@item @var{r}|@var{s}
@dfn{Union}.  This regular expression matches a lexeme if the lexeme is
matched by @var{r} or by @var{s}.

@item @var{r}@var{s}
@dfn{Concatenation}.  This expression matches a lexeme if the lexeme can
be written as the concatenation of a lexeme matched by @var{r} and a
lexeme matched by @var{s}.

@item @var{r}?
@dfn{Optional expression}.  A lexeme matches this expression if it is
the empty lexeme or if it matches @var{r}.

@item @var{r}+
@dfn{Positive closure}.  This expression matches a lexeme that can be
written as the concatenation of one or more lexemes, where each of those
matches @var{r}.

@item @var{r}*
@dfn{Kleene closure}.  A lexeme is matched by this expression if it can
be written as the concatenation of zero or more lexemes, where each of
those matches @var{r}.

@item @var{r}@{@var{i}@}
@itemx @var{r}@{@var{i},@}
@itemx @var{r}@{@var{i},@var{j}@}
@dfn{Power or repetition of an expression}.  These expressions allow the
``repetition'' of a regular expression a certain number of times.
@var{i} and @var{j} must be positive integers and @var{j} must be
greater than, or equal to, @var{i}.

The first form repeats the expression @var{r} exactly @var{i} times.
The second form repeats @var{r} at least @var{i} times.  The last form
repeats @var{r} at least @var{i} times and at most @var{j} times.

We should avoid using large numbers (more than @math{10}), because the
finite automaton for @var{r} is copied once for each repetition.  The
tables of the analyser may quickly become very large.  We should note
that the syntax of these expressions does not conflict with the syntax
of the macro reference.

@item (@var{r})
@dfn{Parentheses}.  This expression matches the same lexemes as @var{r}.
It is used to override the precedence of the operators.
@end table

The building operators are listed in order of increasing precedence.
The @code{?}, @code{+}, @code{*} and repetition operators have the same
precedence.

@c page
@node silex syntax regexp marker
@subsection Markers


The remaining ``expressions'' would better be called @dfn{markers}.
They all match the empty lexeme but require certain conditions to be
respected in the input.  They cannot be used in all regular expressions.
Suppose that @var{r} is a regular expression without markers.

@table @code
@item ^@var{r}
@itemx @var{r}$
@dfn{Beginning and end of line}.  These markers require that the lexeme
is found at the beginning or at the end of the line, respectively.  The
markers lose their special meaning if they are not placed at the
beginning or end of the regular expression, or if they are used in the
first part of the specification.  In those cases, they are treated as
regular characters.

@item <<EOF>>
@dfn{End of file}.  This marker is matched only when the input system is
at the end of input.  The marker must be used alone in its pattern, and
only in the second part of the specification.  There can be at most one
rule with this particular pattern.

@item <<ERROR>>
@dfn{Error}.  This marker is matched only when there is a parsing error.
It can be used under the same conditions as @code{<<EOF>>}.
@end table

@c page
@node silex syntax regexp space
@subsection White spaces in regular expressions


White space ends the regular expressions.  In order to include white
space in a regular expression, it must be protected by a backslash or
placed in a string.

@c page
@node silex syntax sample
@subsection An example of a specification file


Here is an example of a SILex specification file.  The file is
syntactically correct from the SILex point of view.  However, many
common mistakes are shown.  The file is not a useful one.

@example
; This is a syntactically correct but silly file.

partial     hel
complete    @{partial@}lo            ; @r{Backward macro ref. only}
digit       [0-9]
letter      [a-zA-Z]

%%

-?@{digit@}+    (cons 'integer yytext)   ; @r{@code{yytext} contains}
                                       ; @r{the lexeme}
-?@{digit@}+\.@{digit@}+[eE][-+]?@{digit@}+
              (cons                ; @r{An action}
               'float              ; @r{spanning multiple}
               yytext)             ; @r{lines}

;             (list 'semicolon)    ; @r{Probably a mistake}

begin         )list 'begin(        ; @r{No error detected here}
end                                ; @r{The action is optional}

\73           (list 'bell-3)       ; @r{It does not match the}
                                   ; @r{char. # 7 followed by @samp{3}}
\0073         (list 'bell-3)       ; @r{Neither does it}
(\7)3         (list 'bell-3)       ; @r{This does it}

"*()+|@{@}[].? are ordinary but \" and \\ are special"

[^\n]         (list 'char)         ; @r{Same thing as @samp{.}}
(@{letter@}|_)(@{letter@}|_|@{digit@})*  ; @r{A C identifier}
[][]                               ; @r{One of the square brackets}

Repe(ti)@{2@}on   (list 'repetition)

^@{letter@}+:   (cons 'label yytext) ; @r{A label placed at the}
                                   ; @r{beginning of the line}
$^                                 ; @r{No special meaning}
<<EOF>>       (list 'eof)          ; @r{Detection of the end of file}
<<ERROR>>     (my-error)           ; @r{Error handling}
@end example

@c page
@node silex semantics
@section Semantics of the specification


An important part of the semantics of a specification is described with
the syntax of the regular expressions.  The remainder is presented here.
We begin with the role of the actions.  Information on the matching
method follows.

@menu
* silex semantics action::      What does an action do.
* silex semantics rules::       When does a regular expression
                                matches the input.
@end menu

@c page
@node silex semantics action
@subsection Evaluation of the actions


@vindex yycontinue
@vindex yygetc
@vindex yyungetc
@vindex yytext
@vindex yyline
@vindex yycolumn
@vindex yyoffset


The action of a rule is evaluated when the corresponding pattern is
matched.  The result of its evaluation is the result that the lexical
analyser returns to its caller.

We can think of an action like this: It is a form which is placed in the
body of a @func{lambda} function, which in turn is invoked when a token
matching the regular expression is found.  So the following
specification:

@example
decint          [0-9]+

%%

@{decint@}        (string->number yytext)
@end example

@noindent
will cause the following code to be put in the generated lexer tables:

@example
(lambda (yytext)
  (string->number yytext))
@end example

@noindent
arguments in the formals of the @func{lambda} are local bindings we can
use in our actions.  There are a few local bindings that are accessible
by the action when it is evaluated: @code{yycontinue}, @code{yygetc},
@code{yyungetc}, @code{yytext}, @code{yyline}, @code{yycolumn} and
@code{yyoffset}.


@deffn Binding yycontinue
Contains the lexical analysis function itself.  Use @code{(yycontinue)}
to ask for the next token.  Typically, the action associated with a
pattern that matches white space is a call to @code{yycontinue}; it has
the effect of skipping the white space.
@end deffn


@deffn Binding yygetc
@deffnx Binding yyungetc
Contain functions to get and unget characters from the input of the
analyser.  They take no argument.  @code{yygetc} returns a character, or
the @samp{(eof-object)} value if the end of input is reached.

They should be used to read characters instead of accessing directly the
input port because the analyser may have read more characters in order
to have a look--ahead.

It is incorrect to try to unget more characters than has been gotten
since @emph{the parsing of the last token}.  If such an attempt is made,
@code{yyungetc} silently refuses.
@end deffn


@deffn Binding yytext
Bound to a string containing the lexeme.  This string is guaranteed not
to be mutated.  The string is created only if the action @emph{seems} to
need it.  The action is considered to need the lexeme when @samp{yytext}
appears somewhere in the text of the action.
@end deffn


@deffn Binding yyline
@deffnx Binding yycolumn
@deffnx Binding yyoffset
Indicate the position in the input at the beginning of the lexeme.
@code{yyline} is the number of the line; the first line is numbered
@math{1}.  @code{yycolumn} is the number of the column; the first column
numbered @math{1}.

It is important to mention that characters such as the tabulation
generate a variable length output when they are printed.  So it would be
more accurate to say that @code{yycolumn} is the index of the first
character of the lexeme, starting at the beginning of the line.

@code{yyoffset} indicates the distance from the beginning of the input;
the first lexeme has offset @math{0}.

The three bindings may not all be existent depending on options given to
the function @func{lex} when generating the tables.
@end deffn


There is a default action that is provided for a rule when its action is
omitted.

@itemize
@item
If the pattern is @samp{<<EOF>>}, the default action returns the
end--of--file object, @samp{(eof-object)}.

@item
If the pattern is @samp{<<ERROR>>}, the default action raises an
assertion violation.  Notice that the error message of this assertion
cannot hold the line and column numbers, because this default action
must be usable by lexers that do not use such counters, too.

@item
The default action for the other patterns is to call the analyser again.
@end itemize

It is clearer (and normally more useful) to specify explicitly the
action associated with each rule.

@c page
@node silex semantics rules
@subsection Matching the rules


Each time the analyser is asked to return a token, it tries to match a
prefix of the input with a pattern.  There may be more than one possible
match; when it is the case, we say there is a conflict.  For example,
suppose we have those regular expressions:

@example
begin
[a-z]*
@end example

@noindent
and the input is @samp{beginning1 @r{@dots{}}}.  We have a match with
the first expression and we have many different matches with the second.
To resolve such a conflict, the longest match is chosen.  So the chosen
match is the one between the lexeme @samp{beginning} and the second
pattern.

Suppose we have the same regular expressions but the input is
@samp{begin+ @r{@dots{}}}.  We have @emph{two} longest match.  This
conflict is resolved by choosing the first pattern that allows a longest
match.  So the chosen match is between the lexeme @samp{begin} and the
first pattern.

The analyser generated by @library{silex} allows the empty lexeme to be
matched if there is no longer match.  However, we should take care not
to call the analyser again without consuming at least one character of
the input: It would cause an infinite loop.

The pattern @samp{<<EOF>>} is matched when the analyser is called and
the input system is at end of input.  In this situation, the marker is
matched even if there is a pattern that matches the empty lexeme.  The
analyser can be called again and again and the @samp{<<EOF>>} pattern
will be matched each time, causing its corresponding action to be
evaluated each time, too.

The pattern @samp{<<ERROR>>} is matched when the input system is not at
end of input and no other match is possible.  Depending on the action
associated with this pattern, our program may choose to stop or choose
to try to recover from the error.  To recover from the error, our
program has to read some characters from the input before it can call
the analyser again.

All lexical analysers generated by @library{silex} are interactive.
That is, they read as few characters as possible to get the longest
match.  This is a useful property when the input is coming from a
terminal.  A lexical analyser is normally based on a finite automaton;
it is the case for the analysers generated by @library{silex}.  A
non--interactive analyser always needs an extra character to provoke an
invalid transition in the automaton.  The longest match is detected this
way.  With an interactive analyser, an extra character is not required
when it is impossible to obtain a longer match.

A lexical analyser generated by @library{silex} does not impose any @i{a
priori} limit on the size of the lexemes.  The internal buffer is
extended each time it is necessary.

@c page
@node silex format
@section Tables output format


The @library{silex} library provides three different encodings of the
tables: the @dfn{decision tree} encoding, the @dfn{portable} encoding
and the ``compilation'' to Scheme code.  The decision tree is the
default.

With the decision tree encoding, the finite automaton of the analyser is
represented with data structures holding integers representation of the
characters (in the sense of @func{char->integer}).  This representation
is the most compact, but it relies on the character integer
representations in @rnrs{6} Schemes.

With the portable encoding, the data structures describing the automaton
contain characters directly.  If the automaton, as generated, contains a
transition from state @var{s} to state @var{t} on character @var{c},
then somewhere in the table there is the Scheme character
@samp{#\@var{c}}.  When the file containing the analyser is loaded in
any implementation, the character is read as is, and not as the number
@samp{(char->integer #\@var{c})}.

This encoding should be portable to non--@rnrs{6} Schemes.  However, it
is less compact.  This is because something like @samp{(65 90)} is more
compact than something like @samp{(#\A #\B @r{@dots{}} #\Y #\Z)} to
represent @samp{[A-Z]}.  The construction of an analyser from a portable
table takes more time than the construction from a default table.  But,
once built, the performance of the analyser is the same in both cases.

It is important to note that in some character sets, the letters or the
digits are not contiguous.  So, in those cases, the regular expression
@samp{[A-Z]} does not necessarily accept only the uppercase letters.

The last encoding is the compilation to Scheme code.  This produces a
fast lexical analyser.  Instead of containing data structures
representing the behavior of the automaton, the table contains Scheme
code that ``hard--codes'' the automaton.  This encoding often generates
big tables.  Such an analyser is not portable to non--@rnrs{6} Schemes.

@c page
@node lalr
@chapter A LALR(1) parser generator


The @library{lalr} library is a LALR(1) parser tables generator.  The
@library{lalr lr-driver} and @library{lalr glr-driver} libraries
generate instances of a parser using a supplied table.  The two drivers
are not compatible, each of them requires a specifically built table.

The algorithm is the same used in @gnu{} Bison and it is described in:

@quotation
F. DeRemer and T. Pennello.  ``Efficient Computation of LALR(1)
Look--Ahead Set''.  TOPLAS, vol. 4, no. 4, october 1982.
@end quotation

@noindent
as a consequence, it is not written in a fully functional style.  In
fact, much of the code is a direct translation from C to Scheme of the
Bison sources.

The library is a port to @rnrs{6} Scheme of Lalr-scm by Dominique
Boucher.  The original source is available at@footnote{@aurl{} last
verified Tue Jul 21, 2009.}:

@center @url{http://code.google.com/p/lalr-scm/}

@menu
* lalr intro::                  Introduction to the LR parser.
* lalr tables::                 Creating parser tables.
* lalr lexer::                  Describing tokens.
* lalr parser::                 Running the parser.
* lalr grammar::                Defining the grammar.
* lalr glr::                    Generalised LR parsing.
@end menu

@c page
@node lalr intro
@section Introduction to the LR parser


This section introduces the behaviour of the LR driver; it is meant to
be a tutorial for users who know nothing about parsing, and it has no
commitment to being rigorous and exhaustive.  This tutorial is meant to
be read in sequence, each section after the other as they appear.

We describe the basic mechanism of the parser, in a way that is easy to
understand.  Let's say we want to compute simple arithmetic expressions
involving numbers, the operators @math{+-*/}, and parentheses to
establish precedence.  We want to compute one--line expressions like:

@example
10
-20
1 + 2
3 * 4 - 5
(6 - (7 - 8)) * 2
@end example

@menu
* lalr intro tokens::           Splitting expressions in
                                semantic tokens.
* lalr intro want::             What we want.
* lalr intro simple::           Simplified parser behaviour.
* lalr intro look::             Why the lookahead.
* lalr intro states::           From symbol sequences to states.
* lalr intro error::            Error recovering.
* lalr intro nonterm::          Non--terminal categories.
@end menu

@c page
@node lalr intro tokens
@subsection Splitting expressions in semantic tokens


The first step is to split the expression in @dfn{tokens}, that is basic
elements having a semantic meaning.  In @samp{3 * 4 - 5} there are five
of them:

@example
3       -> number
*       -> operator
4       -> number
-       -> operator
5       -> number
@end example

Splitting the input into tokens is the job of the lexer.  We cannot
decide what the lexer has to do if we do not define the parser grammar
first.

We can be sure that we want to deal with every number @math{3} in the
same way, the same goes for every operator @math{*}.  But there is more
of this.

Scheme implements the functions @func{+}, @func{-}, @func{*}, @func{/}
which can be applied to every Scheme's number object; so it is
reasonable to state that: We are not interested in the concrete value of
each number, but only in the abstract fact that they are numbers.  We
can say that all the number tokens are in the same @dfn{category}; let's
use the Scheme symbol @samp{N} to indicate it.  @samp{N} is an
abstraction for each number.

The Scheme functions @func{+}, @func{-}, @func{*}, @func{/} are all
applied in the same way, but the arithmetic operators @math{+-*/} are
not: @math{+} and @math{-} can be both unary and binary, @math{*} and
@math{/} take precedence over @math{+} and @math{-}.  We may come up
with the following alternative categorisations:

@itemize
@item
All the operator tokens are in the same category.

@item
The operators @math{+} and @math{-} are in a category; the operators
@math{*} and @math{/} are in another category.

@item
Each operator has its own category.
@end itemize

Putting all the tokens equal to each other in the same category is
always safe, but it leads to an explosion of the number of categories;
this complicates the definition of the grammar.  Experience shows that
``it works'' to put @math{+} and @math{-} in a category, let's call it
@samp{A} like addition, and @math{*} and @math{/} in another category,
let's call it @samp{M} like multiplication.

With these abstractions, we can see the expression @samp{3 * 4 - 5} as
the following ordered sequence of categorised tokens:

@example
[N, 3]  [M, *]  [N, 4]  [A, -]  [N, 5]
@end example

@noindent
the parser will not be interested in the concrete values, only in the
categories; so it will see the sequence as just:

@example
N M N A N
@end example

We want to support parentheses, too.  The semantic meaning of the open
parenthesis is different from the semantic meaning of the closed one;
@math{(1 + 2)} makes sense, but @math{(1 + 2(} is wrong; giving
different semantic meaning to the parentheses is mandatory to recognise
nested expressions like @math{(1 * (2 + 3))}.  So we assign the open
parenthesis to the category @samp{O} and the closed one to the category
@samp{C}; with these abstractions, the expression:

@example
(6 - (7 - 8)) * 2
@end example

@noindent
is tokenised by the following ordered sequence (from left to right, then
top to bottom):

@example
[O, (]  [N, 6]  [A, -]  [O, (]  [N, 7]  [A, -]
[N, 8]  [C, )]  [C, )]  [M, *]  [N, 2]
@end example

@noindent
but the parser is interested only in the categories:

@example
O N A O N A N C C M N
@end example

The categories defined so far are not the only ones with which an LR
parser is concerned; we call them @dfn{terminal categories} or
@dfn{terminal symbols} or just @dfn{terminals}, because they are direct
abstractions of concrete values.  In contrast, the other categories are
called @dfn{non--terminal categories} or @dfn{non--terminal symbols} or
just @dfn{non--terminals}, because they are higher level abstractions
for sequences of terminals and nested non--terminals.

When modeling a terminal with a Scheme object, we need at least two
fields:

@enumerate
@item
The Scheme symbol representing the category.

@item
The Scheme object representing the concrete value.  We can represent:

@itemize
@item
Number tokens with Scheme number objects.

@item
Operator tokens with the Scheme functions implementing them.

@item
Parenthesis tokens with the Scheme characters @samp{#\(} and @samp{#\)}.
@end itemize
@end enumerate

Experience shows that it is useful to define yet another token: The
end--of-input; it is used by the lexer to signal the no more tokens are
available.  We need to define a new terminal category for this, let's
call it @samp{*eoi*}.  The concrete value of this terminal is not
important, we can just select @samp{(eof-object)}; in what follows we
will display it as @samp{#<eof>}.

Putting all together, given the input expression:

@example
(6 - (7 - 8)) * 2
@end example

@noindent
the lexer transforms it into the ordered sequence of tokens:

@example
[O, (]  [N, 6]  [A, -]  [O, (]  [N, 7]  [A, -]
[N, 8]  [C, )]  [C, )]  [M, *]  [N, 2]  [*eoi*, #<eof>]
@end example

@noindent
and the parser will operate on the terminal categories:

@example
O N A O N A N C C M N *eoi*
@end example

@c page
@node lalr intro want
@subsection What we want


Let's take the simple expression @samp{1 + 2 * 3}; its tokenisation is:

@example
[N, 1] [A, +] [N, 2] [M, *] [N, 3] [*eoi*, #<eof>]
@end example

@noindent
and we can imagine values and category symbols to be available in Scheme
vectors:

@example
#(1  +  2  *  3  #<eof>)
#(N  A  N  M  N   *eoi*)
@end example

@noindent
experience shows that it is useful to consider a fake first element in
both vectors; we assign this element to an additional terminal category
whose symbol is @samp{S} as in start, its value is not important so we
select @false{}:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  *  3  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N  M  N   *eoi*)
@end example

Basically, we want the following:

@enumerate
@item
The parser has to recognise the subvectors @samp{N A N} and @samp{N M N}
as representing expressions it can compute.

@item
The parser must recognise that @samp{N M N} has precedence above @samp{N
A N}.  @samp{N M N} has to be computed first.

@item
The values @samp{2 * 3} have to be fed to a @dfn{semantic clause} of our
choice to compute a result; the semantic clause is just a Scheme form in
which we do whatever we want with the three operands @samp{2}, @samp{*}
and @samp{3}.  For example, we can compute the result @math{2 * 3 = 6}.

The parser generator should create code equivalent to:

@example
(let (($3   2)   ;
      ($2   *)   ; Automatically generated preamble
      ($1   3))  ;

  ($2 $3 $1))    ; Client-supplied semantic clause
@end example

So we want the parser to mutate the vectors as follows:

@example
#(#f  1  +  6  #<eof>  #f #f)
#( S  N  A  N   *eoi*  #f #f)
@end example

@item
The parser has to recognise the subvector @samp{N A N} has representing
a sequence it can compute; the values have to be fed to a semantic
action; let's say it computes the result @math{1 + 6 = 7}.

So we want the parser to mutate the vectors as follows:

@example
#(#f  7  #<eof>  #f #f #f #f)
#( S  N   *eoi*  #f #f #f #f)
@end example

@item
Finally we want the parser to recognise @samp{*eoi*} as the
end--of--input terminal, and to finish the parsing operation returning
the value @samp{7} it left in the vector before.
@end enumerate

@c page
@node lalr intro simple
@subsection Simplified parser behaviour


We can describe the desired behaviour of the LR driver in terms of three
basic actions: lookahead, shift, reduce; with the addition of two
special actions: accept, error.  We assume that the parser can consult a
data structure called @dfn{grammar} and decide what to do, we can think
of it as an associative container.

We scan the vectors using a variable @samp{p} (as in ``pointer'')
holding the index of the current element; at first @samp{p} is set to
zero, so it references the terminal @samp{S}:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N   *eoi*)
   |
   p
@end example

The first action is always a @dfn{lookahead}, that is: To look at the
element at index @samp{1 + p} and acquire its category; such element is
always a terminal, in this case with symbol @samp{N}.

The parser searches the grammar for the sequence @samp{S N}: It finds
that the action associated to it is a @dfn{shift}, that is: Increment
@samp{p} by @math{1}.  The parser obeys:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N   *eoi*)
      |
      p
@end example

A shift action is similar to pushing a value on a stack; for this
reason, we name the Scheme vectors @dfn{stacks} and the variable
@samp{p} @dfn{stack pointer}.

After a shift, the parser always performs a lookahead, it acquires the
symbol @samp{A}.  Parser searches the grammar for the sequences @samp{S
N A} and @samp{N A}, in this order, stopping at the first with an action
associated to it; if finds that @samp{S N A} has no action, but @samp{N
A} is associated to a shift.  Parser obeys:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N   *eoi*)
         |
         p
@end example

Again after a shift, the parser performs a lookahead; it acquires the
symbol @samp{N}.  Parser searches the grammar for each of the sequences:

@example
S N A N
N A N
A N
@end example

@noindent
stopping at the first with an action associated to it; the action
associated to @samp{N A N} is a shift.  Parser obeys:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N   *eoi*)
            |
            p
@end example

After the shift, parser performs a lookahead; it acquires the symbol
@samp{*eoi*}.  Parser searches the grammar for each of the sequences:

@example
S N A N *eoi*
N A N *eoi*
A N *eoi*
N *eoi*
@end example

@noindent
stopping at the first with an action associated to it; the action
associated to @samp{N A N *eoi*} is a @dfn{reduce}: Take the values
associated to @samp{N A N}, that is @samp{1 + 2}, and use them as
arguments for the semantic clause the grammar associates to @samp{N A N
*eoi*}.

We have established that we want the semantic clauses to compute the
given expression, so the result of the evaluation is @samp{3}; parser
searches the grammar, finding that the result associated to @samp{N A N
*eoi*} has to be of category @samp{N}; so it mutates the stacks and the
stack pointer as follows:

@example
#(#f  3 #<eof>  #f  #f)
#( S  N  *eoi*  #f  #f)
      |
      p
@end example

After a reduce, parser performs a lookahead; it acquires the symbol
@samp{*eoi*}, again.  Parser searches the grammar for the sequences
@samp{S N *eoi*} and @samp{N *eoi*}; it finds the action associated to
@samp{S N *eoi*} is @dfn{accept}, that is: Stop parsing and return the
value referenced by the stack pointer, which is @samp{3}.

Let's see, more briefly, what happens when parsing:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  *  3  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N  M  N   *eoi*)
   |
   p
@end example

@noindent
everything is the same as before until:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  *  3  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N  M  N   *eoi*)
            |
            p
@end example

@noindent
in the previous example the lookahead returned @samp{*eoi*} and the
grammar said ``reduce'' for @samp{N A N *eoi*}; here the lookahead
returns @samp{M} and the grammar says ``shift'' for @samp{N A N M}:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  *  3  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N  M  N   *eoi*)
               |
               p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{N} and the grammar says ``shift'' for
@samp{N M N}:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  *  3  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N  M  N   *eoi*)
                  |
                  p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{*eoi*} and the grammar says ``reduce'' for
@samp{N M N *eoi*}:

@example
#(#f  1  +  6  #<eof>  #f #f)
#( S  N  A  N   *eoi*  #f #f)
            |
            p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{*eoi*} and the grammar says ``reduce'' for
@samp{N A N *eoi*}:

@example
#(#f  7  #<eof>  #f #f #f #f)
#( S  N   *eoi*  #f #f #f #f)
      |
      p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{*eoi*} and the grammar says ``accept'' for
@samp{S N *eoi*}.

@c page
@node lalr intro look
@subsection Why the lookahead


Why do we need to look ahead at the next token's category?  When the
stacks are:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N   *eoi*)
            |
            p
@end example

@noindent
we can recognise the subvector @samp{N A N} to be a reducible one
without looking a the next token's category; the same goes with:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  -  3  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N  A  N   *eoi*)
            |
            p
@end example

But let's look at:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  *  3  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N  M  N   *eoi*)
            |
            p
@end example

@noindent
it is an error to reduce @samp{N A N}, because the following
multiplication takes precedence over addition; we can detect the need to
give precedence to what follows only by looking at the next token's
category.

This is not always the case.  Let's make a change to our parser, let's
say we want to parse scripts in which every line is an arithmetic
expression.  We add a new token with category @samp{T}, as in
terminator, and value @samp{#\newline}.

Let's look at this example:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  *  3  #\newline  4  /  5  #\newline  #<eof>)
#( S  N  A  N  M  N  T          N  M  N  T           *eoi*)
                  |
                  p
@end example

@noindent
once the parser has performed the lookahead and detected the @samp{T}
category, the grammar can tell it to reduce twice the stack, without
doing another lookahead:

@example
#(#f  1  +  6  #\newline  4  /  5  #\newline  #<eof>  #f #f)
#( S  N  A  N  T          N  M  N  T           *eoi*  #f #f)
            |
            p

#(#f  7  #\newline  4  /  5  #\newline  #<eof>  #f #f #f #f)
#( S  N  T          N  M  N  T           *eoi*  #f #f #f #f)
      |
      p
@end example

Notice that, with a well written grammar, the parser generator can
understand that the result of the first line is no more needed and
remove it with a reduce action.  Starting from the above stacks, the
lookahead returns @samp{T} and the action is shift:

@example
#(#f  7  #\newline  4  /  5  #\newline  #<eof>  #f #f #f #f)
#( S  N  T          N  M  N  T           *eoi*  #f #f #f #f)
         |
         p
@end example

@noindent
now the lookahead returns @samp{N} and the action can be a reduction
which puts the stacks in the following state:

@example
#(#f  4  /  5  #\newline  #<eof>  #f #f #f #f #f #f)
#( S  N  M  N  T           *eoi*  #f #f #f #f #f #f)
   |
   p
@end example

@noindent
parser is ready to start a new line.

@c page
@node lalr intro states
@subsection From symbol sequences to states


We have seen that parser searches the grammar for an action associated
to a sequence of categories; this is inefficient.  We can represent the
grammar with a directed graph, having a single source and a single sink,
in which:

@itemize
@item
Each sequence of categories having an action is represented by a
state--node.

@item
Every shift and every reduce causes a transaction from one node to the
other.

@item
The lookahead determines which outgoing transaction link to take from a
given node.
@end itemize

There are many possible expressions and many possible paths in the
graph; for example, the following expressions:

@example
1
1 + 2
1 + (2 * 3)
3 * 4
@end example

@noindent
and much more can be represented by the following sequences of
terminals:

@example
N *eoi*
N A N *eoi*
N A O N M N C *eoi*
N M N *eoi*
@end example

@noindent
which in turn are represented by the following graph, in which every
node has a numeric index (from @math{0} to @math{11}) and every terminal
category (@samp{N}, @samp{A}, @samp{M}, @samp{C}, @samp{O}) has the
associated action between parenthesis (@samp{s} for shift, @samp{r} for
reduce, @samp{a} for accept):

@example
         (11) finish
          ^
          |
          |*eoi*(a)
     N(s) |
 (0)---->(1)<------------+------------------------------
start     |              |                              |
          |              |*eoi*(r)                      |
          | A(s)    N(s) |           *eoi*(r)           |
          +----->(2)--->(3)<-------------------------   |
          |       |                                  |  |
          |       |                                  |  |
          |       | O(s)   N(s)   M(s)   N(s)   C(s) |  |
          |        ---->(4)--->(5)--->(6)--->(7)--->(8) |
          |                                             |
          |                                             |
          | M(s)    N(s)      *eoi*(r)                  |
           ----->(9)--->(10)----------------------------
@end example

Starting from node @math{0}, with each shift and reduce we move our
position in the graph to some node.  What matters to select the next
action to perform, is just the node we are in and the category of the
lookahead token.

Let's try it with the expression @samp{1 + 2}; we add a stack for the
current node number:

@example
#(#f   1   +   2  #<eof>)
#( S   N   A   N   *eoi*)
#( 0  #f  #f  #f      #f)
   |
   p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{N} and the grammar associates @samp{[0, N]}
with @samp{[1, shift]}:

@example
#(#f   1   +   2  #<eof>)
#( S   N   A   N   *eoi*)
#( 0   1  #f  #f      #f)
       |
       p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{A} and the grammar associates @samp{[1, A]}
with @samp{[2, shift]}:

@example
#(#f   1   +   2  #<eof>)
#( S   N   A   N   *eoi*)
#( 0   1   2  #f      #f)
           |
           p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{N} and the grammar associates @samp{[2, N]}
with @samp{[3, shift]}:

@example
#(#f   1   +   2  #<eof>)
#( S   N   A   N   *eoi*)
#( 0   1   2   3      #f)
               |
               p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{*eoi*} and the grammar associates @samp{[3,
*eoi*]} with @samp{[1, reduce]}:

@example
#(#f   3  #<eof>  #f  #f)
#( S   N   *eoi*  #f  #f)
#( 0   1      #f  #f  #f)
       |
       p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{*eoi*} and the grammar associates @samp{[1,
*eoi*]} with @samp{[11, accept]}.

@c page
@node lalr intro error
@subsection Error recovering


Until now we have seen only examples for which, given a sequence of
symbols @samp{S A B C} and a lookahead @samp{D}, at least one of the
sequences:

@example
S A B C D
A B C D
B C D
C D
@end example

@noindent
has an action associated to it in the grammar; in other words, using the
graph model:

@itemize
@item
The state associated to the sequence @samp{S A B C} has an
outgoing link associated to the lookahead @samp{D}, or

@item
The state associated to the sequence @samp{A B C} has an outgoing link
associated to the lookahead @samp{D}, or

@item
The state associated to the sequence @samp{B C} has an outgoing link
associated to the lookahead @samp{D}, or

@item
The state associated to the sequence @samp{C} has an outgoing link
associated to the lookahead @samp{D}.
@end itemize

What happens if the lookahead is not associated to an outgoing link?  It
means that the sequence of tokens does not comply with the defined
grammar.  There are two possible reactions to this: Stop parsing and
signal an error, or try to recover.

Recovering makes sense only when the grammar is such that: It is
possible to discard a subsequence of symbols as invalid, and go on
parsing the following symbols.

In the example of the single expressions parser: If the lookahead
returns an invalid category symbol, the only possible reaction is to
stop parsing and signal an error.  The whole expression is wrong.

In the example of the script expression parser: We can discard an
invalid line and try to parse the following ones.  Let's examine how
this is done by the LR driver.

The valid terminal categories are:

@example
N A M O C T *eoi*
@end example

@noindent
where @samp{T} is the line terminator; examples of valid lines are:

@example
N T
A N T
N A N T
N M N T
N A N M N T
@end example

If we use a grammar describing a sequence of lines, the grammar
``knows'' that after each line it has to reduce the stacks to the
starting symbol; it knows that @samp{S} is the first symbol of each
line.  For example:

@example
#(#f  1  +  2  #\newline  3  *  4  #\newline  #<eof>)
#(S   N  A  N  T          N  M  N  T          *eoi*)
@end example

@noindent
after parsing the first line is reduced to:

@example
#(#f  3  *  4  #\newline  #<eof>  #f #f #f)
#(S   N  M  N  T          *eoi*   #f #f #f)
@end example

When writing the grammar specification: We associate an error action to
the beginning of a line, and it ends up being associated to @samp{S}.

Let's consider the following couple of lines, with the first being a
wrong expression:

@example
#(#f  1  +  #\newline  3  *  4  #\newline  #<eof>)
#(S   N  A  T          N  M  N  T          *eoi*)
@end example

@noindent
when the stack pointer references the symbol @samp{A}, the lookahead
returns @samp{T} and the grammar signals an error.  The parser
decrements the pointer, ``rewinding'' the stack, in search of a symbol
which has an error action associated to it.  It finds that @samp{S} has
such an action, and it is associated to the symbol @samp{T}; so it
removes all the symbols between @samp{S}, excluded, and the first
@samp{T}, excluded:

@example
#(#f  #\newline  3  *  4  #\newline  #<eof>  #f #f)
#(S   T          N  M  N  T           *eoi*  #f #f)
  |
  p
@end example

@noindent
and it restarts parsing doing a lookahead that returns @samp{T}; the
action is a shift:

@example
#(#f  #\newline  3  *  4  #\newline  #<eof>  #f #f)
#(S   T          N  M  N  T           *eoi*  #f #f)
      |
      p
@end example

@noindent
the lookahead returns @samp{N} and the action is a reduce:

@example
#(#f  3  *  4  #\newline  #<eof>  #f #f #f)
#(S   N  M  N  T          *eoi*   #f #f #f)
  |
  p
@end example

@noindent
we have recovered from the error.

@c page
@node lalr intro nonterm
@subsection Non--terminal categories


We have seen the graph representation of the grammar with tokens
belonging to terminal categories.  But how many nodes are there in such
a graph?  There are an infinite number of expressions, and consequently
an infinite number of sequences of terminals is required to represent
them.  This would make it impossible to code a parser, unless we take a
different approach.

We start by noticing that, if the following sequences of terminals
represent expressions:

@example
N
A N
N A N
N M N
@end example

@noindent
then the following sequences of terminals represent expressions with
subexpression:

@example
N A  N
N A  A N
N A  N A N
N A  N M N

N M  N
N M  A N
N M  N A N
N M  N M N
@end example

Let's define a new category, indicated by the Scheme symbol @samp{E},
which represents the basic expressions:

@example
E @equiv{} N
  @equiv{} A N
  @equiv{} N A N
  @equiv{} N M N
@end example

@noindent
then we can represent the composite sequences written above with:

@example
N A E
N M E
@end example

@noindent
and more generally:

@example
E A E
E M E
@end example

Let's suppose in defining the category @samp{E} we can use @samp{E}
itself, recursively; then we can write:

@example
E @equiv{} N
  @equiv{} A E
  @equiv{} E A E
  @equiv{} E M E
  @equiv{} O E C
@end example

@noindent
in which we have included a rule for the parentheses; with this
definition involving a few symbols we can represent the whole set of
possible expressions.  @library{lalr} allows us to do exactly this,
using the following S--expression:

@example
(E (N)
   (A E)
   (E A E)
   (E M E)
   (O E C))
@end example

Categories defined this way, as sequences of the same and other
categories, are called non--terminals for reasons we can imagine.  The
definition of non--terminals changes nothing in the way the parser
itself works, but it is the fundamental tool to describe the grammar.
We can use any number of non--terminals to describe a grammar.

@c page
@node lalr tables
@section Creating parser tables


The following bindings, keywords included, are exported by the
@library{lalr} library.


@defun lalr-parser @var{keyword} @var{value} ...
@defunx make-lalr-parser @var{keyword} @var{value} ...
Generate a parser table to be used by the LR or GLR drivers.  The
behaviour of this function is configured with the
@var{keyword}/@var{value} couples used as arguments; see below for the
list of supported options.  @ref{keywords, Keyword values}

@ref{lalr grammar, Defining the parser}, for the definition of the
grammar and the meaning of the @samp{:terminals} and @samp{:rules}
options.

The core of the output is a set of parser ``tables'': Scheme vectors
representing the automaton.  There are three of them: action, goto,
reduction.  The tables are used as arguments for a call to
@func{lr-driver} or @func{glr-driver}: Their return value is a closure
implementing an instance of the parser.
@end defun


@deffn Option :terminals @var{sexpr}
Specifies a list representing the terminal symbols, their precedence and
their associativity.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :rules @var{sexpr}
Specifies a list representing the grammar production rules.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :expect @var{number-of-conflicts}
Specifies the number of rule conflicts we expect in the parser
definition.  The default is zero.

When more than @var{number-of-conflicts} are detected, warning messages
are printed to the current error port.  If @var{number-of-conflicts} is
@false{}, rather than an exact non-negative integer, no message is ever
displayed on the error port.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :parser-type @var{driver}
Select the type of tables to generate.  Available drivers are selected
with a symbol among: @samp{lr}, @samp{glr}.  The default is @samp{lr}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :output-value #t|#f
If the value is true, instruct @func{lalr-parser} to evaluate the output
with @func{eval} and return a proper Scheme function implementing a
parser maker.  @ref{stdlib eval, Evaluation}

With this option, in the case of the @samp{lr} driver, the generated
code has the form:

@example
(lambda ()
  (lr-driver <action-table> <goto-table> <reduction-table>))
@end example

@noindent
so the value returned by @func{lalr-parser} is a closure which, when
evaluated with no arguments, returns a new parser closure.  See
@samp{:library-imports} to add libraries to the evaluation environment.

When used together, this option supersedes @samp{:output-port} and
@samp{:output-file}.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :output-port @var{port}
Instruct @func{lalr-parser} to print the generated code to the specified
port.  When used together, this option supersedes @samp{:output-file}.

When neither @samp{:library-spec} nor @samp{:parser-name} are used, the
output is the same as the one generated by @samp{:output-value}: A
lambda function returning new parser closures.  See @samp{:library-spec}
and @samp{:parser-name} for details on the other output types.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :output-file @var{pathname}
Instruct @func{lalr-parser} to save the generated code to the specified
file; the file will be overwritten if it already exists.  @var{pathname}
must be a Scheme string representing a file pathname.

When neither @samp{:library-spec} nor @samp{:parser-name} are used, the
output is the same as the one generated by @samp{:output-value}: A
lambda function returning new parser closures.  See @samp{:library-spec}
and @samp{:parser-name} for details on the other output types.
@end deffn


@deffn Option :dump-table @var{pathname}
Instruct @func{lalr-parser} to save a human readable dump of the
generated parser in the specified file.  The file will be overwritten if
it already exists.  This is useful for debugging purposes (if we know
how the parser works).
@end deffn


@deffn Option :parser-name @var{name}
Instruct @func{lalr-parser} to use the symbol @var{name} as identifier
to which bind the parser maker function.  It is mandatory to use this
option when generating a library.

If this option is used, but @samp{:library-spec} is not: The output is a
@func{define} form which, when evaluated, binds the parser maker to
@var{name}.  Example output for the @samp{lr} driver:

@example
(define (@var{name})
  (lr-driver <action-table> <goto-table> <reduction-table>))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Option :library-spec @var{spec}
Instruct @func{lalr-parser} to generate a proper Scheme library, holding
the parser definition and exporting a binding to the parser maker
function.  @var{spec} must be a proper @meta{library name} as defined by
@rnrs{6}.  @ref{lang library form, Libary form}

This option is especially useful in conjunction with @samp{output-file}.
It is mandatory to use the option @samp{:parser-name} along with
@samp{:library-spec}.

Example output for the @samp{lr} driver assuming @var{name} is the value
used for the @samp{:parser-name} option:

@example
(library @var{spec}
  (export @var{name})
  (import (rnrs)
          (lalr lr-driver)
          (parser-tools source-location)
          (parser-tools lexical-token)
          (sentinel))
  (define (@var{name})
    (lr-driver <action-table> <goto-table>
               <reduction-table>)))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Option :library-imports @var{imports}
Instruct @func{lalr-parser} to add @var{imports} to the list of Scheme
libraries required by the parser definition.  @var{imports} must be a
list of library specifications; for example, if the parser definition
(meaning the semantic actions) requires the @library{alpha} and
@library{beta} libraries, we must use:

@example
:library-imports '((alpha) (beta))
@end example

The selected imports will be added to the import list of the generated
library (if @samp{:library-spec} is used), or to the @func{eval}
environment argument (if @samp{:output-value} is used).  The imports are
ignored when the output is a @func{define} form.

By default, the import list always includes @samp{(rnrs)}, the selected
driver's library @library{lalr lr-driver} or @library{lalr glr-driver}
and the following libraries:

@example
(parser-tools source-location)
(parser-tools lexical-token)
(sentinel)
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node lalr lexer
@section Describing tokens


The parser closure accepts as argument a lexer closure which, invoked
with no arguments, must return the next token from the input.  Tokens
are described using records of type @class{lexical-token}.  The current
position in the input stream is described using records of type
@class{source-location}.  @ref{parser-tools} for the definition of these
record types.

Once the lexer closure finds the end of input, it must return a token
with category @samp{*eoi*}; it must continue to return such a token if
invoked multiple times.

If the lexer closure finds a lexer error in the input, it must return a
token with category @samp{*lexer-error*}; lexer errors are
unrecoverable.

@c page
@node lalr parser
@section Running the parser


Here we suppose to have used @func{lalr-parser} to generate a proper
Scheme library exporting a binding to the parser maker.  Let
@library{calc-parser} be the library specification and
@func{make-calc-parser} the name of the binding to the parser maker.

The parser maker is invoked with no arguments and returns a new parser
closure, which represents an instance of the parser.  To create a parser
closure we do:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (calc-parser))

(define parser (make-calc-parser))
@end example

The @func{parser} function accepts two or three arguments: the lexer
closure, an error handler procedure, a custom value.  When invoked, it
consumes tokens from the lexer until the end of input is found or an
unrecoverable error occurs.

To invoke @func{parser} with a lexer generated by the @library{silex}
library, using a table in @samp{calc-lexer-table} to parse
@var{input-string}, we do:

@example
(let* ((IS        (lexer-make-IS :string @var{input-string}
                                 :counters 'all))
       (lexer     (lexer-make-lexer calc-lexer-table IS))
       (error-hnd (lambda (message token) ---))
       (yycustom  #f))
  (parser lexer error-hnd yycustom))
@end example

The parser closure will return the value computed by the semantic clause
of the outer non--terminal, the @dfn{start symbol}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The lexical analyser

The lexer closure must be a thunk invoked each time the parser needs to
lookahead in the token stream.  Its return value must be a record of
type @class{lexical-token}.  @ref{parser-tools token, Lexical token
records}

Once the lexer closure finds the end of input, it must return a token
with category @samp{*eoi*}; it must continue to return such a token if
invoked multiple times.

If the lexer closure finds a lexer error in the input, it must return a
token with category @samp{*lexer-error*}; lexer errors are
unrecoverable.

If the lexer raises an exception, it will go through the parser closure
with no obstacles.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The error procedure

It must be a function accepting two arguments: an error message as
Scheme string, the lexical token that caused the error.  Its return
value does not matter for the parser itself.

If the error procedure returns, the parser closure attempts to recover
from the error and to resume parsing.  If it raises an exception parsing
may stop, depending on how the program deals with it.

A simple error procedure raising an exception looks like this:

@example
(define (error-handler message token)
  (error #f
    (if (or (not (<lexical-token>? token))
            (not (<lexical-token>-location token)))
        message
      (let* ((position  (<lexical-token>-source   token))
             (line      (<source-location>-line   position))
             (column    (<source-location>-column position)))
        (string-append message
          " line "
          (if line   (number->string line)   "unknown")
          " column "
          (if column (number->string column) "unknown"))))
    token))
@end example

@noindent
notice how the handler detects if the @samp{location} field of the
@class{lexical-token} record is @false{} or a @class{source-location}
record.

The error procedure is invoked:

@itemize
@item
When an invalid value is returned by the lexer.  If the value is not a
@class{lexical-token} record, the error procedure is invoked with the
offending value as second argument.

Parsing stops and the return value of the parser closure is the return
value of the error procedure, if any.

@item
When the stream of tokens returned by the lexer violates parser's
grammar.

@itemize -
@item
If the error is an unexpected end--of--input, the second argument is a
@class{lexical-token} record with @samp{*eoi*} in the category field.

Parsing stops and the return value of the parser closure is the return
value of the error procedure, if any.

@item
If the error is another grammar violation, the error procedure is
invoked with the offending value as second argument; its return value,
if any, is discarded.

If the error procedure returns, the parser will try to recover from the
error and resume parsing; if error recovery fails, the parser behaves as
if the end--of--input is found.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@c page
@node lalr grammar
@section Defining the parser


@menu
* lalr grammar intro::          Introduction to grammar definition.
* lalr grammar precedence::     Operator precedence and associativity.
* lalr grammar clauses::        Writing semantic clauses.
* lalr grammar error::          Error recovery.
* lalr grammar conflict::       Conflicts resolution.
* lalr grammar examples::       Dummy examples of grammar definitions.
@end menu

@c page
@node lalr grammar intro
@subsection Introduction to grammar definition


The grammar is defined by the list of terminal token categories and the
list of non--terminal definitions.  Each non--terminal definition is a
list where the first element is the non--terminal and the other elements
are the right--hand sides (lists of grammar symbols).  In addition to
this, each right--hand side can be followed by a semantic clause.

For example, consider the following (Yacc) grammar for a very simple
expression language:

@example
e : e '+' t
  | e '-' t
  | t
  ;

t : t '*' f
  : t '/' f
  | f
  ;

f : ID
  ;
@end example

@noindent
the same grammar, written with @library{lalr}, would look like this:

@example
(lalr-parser

  :terminals '(ID + - * /)

  :rules '((e (e + t)    : (+ $1 $3)
              (e - t)    : (- $1 $3)
              (t)        : $1)

           (t (t * f)    : (* $1 $3)
              (t / f)    : (/ $1 $3)
              (f)        : $1)

           (f (ID)       : $1))

  ---) ;other options
@end example

Here the symbols @samp{ID}, @samp{+}, @samp{-}, @samp{*}, @samp{/}
represent the terminal token categories; each token returned by the
lexer closure must belong to one of these.  The non--terminal
definitions are the symbols @samp{e}, @samp{t} and @samp{f}; the
right--hand sides of @samp{e} are the rules:

@example
(e + t)
(e - t)
(t)
@end example

@noindent
which are used to match sequences of terminals and non--terminals.  The
rule @samp{(e + t)} has the semantic clause @samp{(+ $1 $3)}.

In the semantic clauses, the symbol @samp{$n} refers to the value of the
@math{n}-th symbol in the right--hand side rule.  For example, when the
sequence of tokens @samp{1 + 2} is matched by the rule:

@example
(e + t)    : (+ $1 $3)
@end example

@noindent
the semantic clause is evaluated with @samp{$1} bound to @samp{1}, and
@samp{$2} bound to @samp{2}; the result of the evaluation of the
semantic clause becomes the value of the non--terminal @samp{e}.

A rule with no semantic clause can be written by omitting the @samp{: ---}
part, example:

@example
(e (e + t)    : (+ $1 $3)
   (e - t)    : (- $1 $3)
   (p)                       ;no semantic clause
   (t)        : $1)
@end example

@noindent
when such a rule matches a sequence of symbols, it generates the
sentinel value.  @ref{sentinel, The sentinel value}

@c page
@node lalr grammar precedence
@subsection Operator precedence and associativity


The grammar defined in the introduction (@ref{lalr grammar intro})
implicitly handles operator precedences.  It is also possible to
explicitly assign precedences and associativity to terminal symbols and
productions a la Yacc.  Here is a modified (and augmented) version of
the grammar:

@example
(lalr-parser

  :terminals '(ID
               (left: + -)
               (left: * /)
               (nonassoc: uminus))

  :rules '((e (e + e)              : (+ $1 $3)
              (e - e)              : (- $1 $3)
              (e * e)              : (* $1 $3)
              (e / e)              : (/ $1 $3)
              (- e (prec: uminus)) : (- $2)
              (ID)                 : $1))

  ---) ;other options
@end example

The @samp{left:} directive is used to specify a set of left--associative
operators of the same precedence level.  The @samp{right:} directive
specifies right--associative operators at the same precedence level.
The @samp{nonassoc:} directive specifies operators that are
non--associative.

Note the use of the (apparently) useless terminal @samp{uminus}.  It is
only defined in order to assign to the penultimate rule a precedence
level higher than that of @samp{*} and @samp{/}.  The @samp{prec:}
directive can only appear as the last element of a rule.

Finally, note that precedence levels are incremented from left to right,
i.e. the precedence level of @samp{+} and @samp{-} is less than the
precedence level of @samp{*} and @samp{/} since the formers appear first
in the list of terminal symbols.

@c page
@node lalr grammar clauses
@subsection Writing semantic clauses


Semantic clauses are Scheme forms that can do anything Scheme allows us
to do.  They are allowed to access the local bindings @samp{$1},
@samp{$2}, @dots{} bound to values in the same number of the symbols of
the production rule.

An important limit is the environment in which the semantic clauses are
evaluated:

@itemize
@item
If we have instructed @func{lalr-parser} to generate a @func{define}
form, we can take the form and place it in our code; in this case the
environment is the one active at that position.

@item
If we have instructed @func{lalr-parser} to generate a proper Scheme
library, we can add libraries specifications to the import list of the
generated library using the @samp{:library-imports} option of
@func{lalr-parser}.

@item
If we have instructed @func{lalr-parser} to evaluate the generated
parser maker using the @library{rnrs eval} library, we can add libraries
specifications to the evaluation environment using the
@samp{:library-imports} option of @func{lalr-parser}.
@end itemize


The following local bindings are accessible in the semantic clauses.


@defun yypushback
If evaluated, tell the parser closure to reuse the last token (as
lookahead) rather than to retrieve a new one from the lexer.  This may
be useful to handle some corner cases in the grammar definition.
@end defun


@defvar yycustom
This is the custom value we give as @var{yycustom} argument to the
parser function.  It can be any value, from a closure to a constant, to
a continuation.
@end defvar

@c page
@node lalr grammar error
@subsection Error recovery


@menu
* lalr grammar error intro::    Introduction to error recovery.
* lalr grammar error single::   Dummy example: Single token parser.
@end menu

@c page
@node lalr grammar error intro
@subsubsection Introduction to error recovery


@library{lalr} implements a very simple error recovery strategy.  A
production can be of the form:

@example
(NON-TERMINAL
   ---                  ;right-hand side rules
   (error TERMINAL) : semantic-clause)
@end example

If, while parsing the right--hand side rules for @samp{NON-TERMINAL},
the lookahead returns an invalid category: The parser resets the state
associated with the parsing of the rule and skips all the tokens
returned by the lexer until one with category @samp{TERMINAL} is found.
The @samp{TERMINAL} token is also discarded and parsing continues with a
new lookahead.

The symbol @samp{error} is reserved as error recovery directive, it
cannot be used as terminal or non--terminal.

There can be several such right--hand side rules for a single
non--terminal: For a C--like language, we could ``synchronise'' on
semicolons and closing curly brackets by writing error rules like these:

@example
(statement
   (expression SEMICOLON)        : ---
   (LBRACKET statement RBRACKET) : ---
   (error SEMICOLON)    ;empty semantic claus
   (error RBRACKET))    ;empty semantic claus
@end example

@noindent
if an error occurs, the parser will discard its internal state up to,
and including, the first token that started the @samp{statement}
non--terminal (@samp{LBRACKET} or the first of @samp{expression}).

@c page
@node lalr grammar error single
@subsubsection Dummy example: Single token parser


Let's consider the following parser which accepts as input only the
sequence: @samp{A}, @samp{*eoi*}; it is a corner case which is useful to
understand.  The correct way to handle this case is to have an error
handler that does not return; in the following the error handler
returns, leaving the parser to handle everything.

@example
(define (example . tokens)
  (let* ((lexer        (make-lexer tokens))
         (make-parser  (lalr-parser
                         :output-value #t
                         :terminals '(A)
                         :rules '((e (A) : $1))))
         (parser       (make-parser)))
    (parser lexer error-handler)))
@end example

We have already examined the correct usage of this grammar (@ref{lalr
grammar examples single}); we can now understand what happens in the
following test:

@example
(example (make-lexical-token 'A #f 1)
         (make-lexical-token 'A #f 2)
         (make-lexical-token 'A #f 3)))
@result{} ("unexpected end of input" . (eof-object))
@end example

@noindent
following the reasoning exposed in the introduction (@pxref{lalr
intro}), we can imagine the input tokens on the following stacks:

@example
#(#f  1  2  3  #<eof>)
#(S   A  A  A   *eoi*)
  |
  p
@end example

@enumerate
@item
The first lookahead returns @samp{A} and the action is a shift:

@example
#(#f  1  2  3  #<eof>)
#(S   A  A  A   *eoi*)
      |
      p
@end example

@item
The second lookahead returns @samp{A} and the action is a reduce, which
changes nothing because there is only one token and the semantic action
is @samp{$1}:

@example
#(#f  1  2  3  #<eof>)
#(S   A  A  A   *eoi*)
      |
      p
@end example

@item
The third lookahead returns @samp{A} and the action is error because
only @samp{*eoi*} is acceptable now.  The error handler is invoked and
its return value discarded.

The parser attempts to recover from the error; we already know that the
recovery will fail, because we have not included any @samp{error}
right--hand side rule in the grammar.

@item
The first operation of recovery is to reset the current parser state
removing everything related to this right--hand side rule:

@example
#(#f  2  3  #<eof>  #f)
#(S   A  A   *eoi*  #f)
  |
  p

@end example

@item
The parser detects the fact that the stack has been fully rewind without
finding a non--terminal with an @samp{error} directive, so it just stops
reading tokens from the lexer and imposes a @samp{*eoi*} token as
lookahead.

@item
The end--of--input token is invalid as lookahead from the initial state,
so an ``unexpected end--of--input error'' is generated; the error
handler is invoked and its return value becomes the return value of the
parser closure.
@end enumerate

@c page
@node lalr grammar conflict
@subsection Conflicts resolution


Conflicts in the grammar are handled in a conventional way.  In the
absence of precedence directives, Shift/Reduce conflicts are resolved by
shifting, and Reduce/Reduce conflicts are resolved by choosing the rule
listed first in the grammar definition.

@c page
@node lalr grammar examples
@subsection Dummy examples of grammar definitions


In this section we examine some dummy parser definitions to understand
some basic mechanism.

@menu
* lalr grammar examples helpers:: Helper definitions.
* lalr grammar examples single::  Single token parser.
@end menu

@c page
@node lalr grammar examples helpers
@subsubsection Helper definitions


In all the examples of this section we will use these helpers:

@example
(define eoi-token
  (make-lexical-token '*eoi* #f (eof-object) 0))

(define (make-lexer list-of-tokens)
  ;;Return a lexer closure  drawing tokens
  ;;from LIST-OF-TOKENS.  When the list is
  ;;empty, return the EOI-TOKEN.
  ;;
  (lambda ()
    (if (null? list-of-tokens)
        eoi-token
      (begin0
          (car list-of-tokens)
        (set! list-of-tokens (cdr list-of-tokens))))))

(define (make-token category semantic-value)
  (make-<lexical-token> category #f semantic-value 0))

(define (error-handler message token)
  (cons message (<lexical-token>-value token)))
@end example

@noindent
we see that the error handler does not raise an exception, so the parser
is allowed to attempt a recovery after an error.

@c page
@node lalr grammar examples single
@subsubsection Single token parser


The following example defines a parser accepting only a single token of
category @samp{A}, which must be followed by the end--of--input
@samp{*eoi*}.  Every other input sequence causes an error; this includes
an @samp{*eoi*} token alone.

@example
(define (example . tokens)
  (let* ((lexer        (make-lexer tokens))
         (make-parser  (lalr-parser
                         :output-value #t
                         :terminals '(A)
                         :rules '((e (A) : $1))))
         (parser       (make-parser)))
    (parser lexer error-handler)))

;;Parse the sequence: A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1))
@result{} 1

;;Parse the sequence: *eoi*
(example)
@result{} ("unexpected end of input" . (eof-object))
@end example

@noindent
the following test raises an error:

@example
(example (make-token 'A 1)
         (make-token 'A 2)
         (make-token 'A 3)))
@result{} ("unexpected end of input" . (eof-object))
@end example

@noindent
we will come back to this test when describing the error recovery
mechanism.  @ref{lalr grammar error, Error recovery}

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Accepting @samp{*eoi*} alone

The following parser defines a grammar which accepts the sequence
@samp{A *eoi*}, but also accepts @samp{*eoi*} alone.

@example
(define (example . tokens)
  (let* ((lexer        (make-lexer tokens))
         (make-parser  (lalr-parser
                         :output-value #t
                         :terminals '(A)
                         :rules '((e (A) : $1)
                                     ()  : 0)))
         (parser       (make-parser)))
    (parser lexer error-handler)))

;;Parse the sequence: A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1))
@result{} 1

;;Parse the sequence: *eoi*
(example)
@result{} 0
@end example

When the input is a single @samp{*eoi*} token: The parser returns the
value of the semantic action in @samp{() : 0}.  When the input is the
sequence @samp{A *eoi*}: The parser returns the value of the semantic
action in @samp{(A) : $1}.  Let's understand why.

Using the reasoning of the introduction (@pxref{lalr intro}), we can
imagine the tokens of the sequence @samp{A *eoi*} on the following
stacks:

@example
#(#f  1  #<eof>)
#(S   A   *eoi*)
  |
  p
@end example

@noindent
the first lookahead returns @samp{A} and the action is shift, we
``enter'' the right--hand side rule @samp{(A)}:

@example
#(#f  1  #<eof>)
#(S   A   *eoi*)
      |
      p
@end example

@noindent
the second lookahead returns @samp{*eoi*} and the action is reduce, we
``leave'' the right--hand side rule @samp{(A)}; one couple is popped
from the stack and one couple is pushed:

@example
#(#f  1  #<eof>)
#(S   e   *eoi*)
      |
      p
@end example

@noindent
the value has not changed because the semantic clause is just @samp{$1}
which is @samp{1} itself; the third lookahead returns @samp{*eoi*} and
the action is accept (the value @samp{1}).

We can imagine the tokens of the sequence @samp{*eoi*} on the following
stacks:

@example
#(#f  #<eof>)
#(S   *eoi*)
  |
  p
@end example

@noindent
the first lookahead returns @samp{*eoi*} and the action is reduce, we
enter and leave the right--hand side rule @samp{()} in a single step; no
couples are popped from the stacks, but a couple is pushed:

@example
#(#f  0  #<eof>)
#(S   e   *eoi*)
      |
      p
@end example

@noindent
we see the result of the semantic clause; the second lookahead returns
@samp{*eoi*} and the action is accept (the value @samp{0}).

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Accepting fixed sequences

The following parser defines a grammar which accepts the following fixed
sequences:

@example
*eoi*
A *eoi*
A A *eoi*
A A A *eoi*
@end example

@noindent
the return value of the parser is the list of values from the tokens.

@example
(define (example . tokens)
  (let* ((lexer        (make-lexer tokens))
         (make-parser  (lalr-parser
                         :output-value #t
                         :terminals '(A)
                         :rules '((e (A)     : (list $1)
                                     (A A)   : (list $1 $2)
                                     (A A A) : (list $1 $2 $3)
                                     ()      : 0))))
         (parser       (make-parser)))
    (parser lexer error-handler)))

;;Parse the sequence: A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1))
@result{} (1)

;;Parse the sequence: A A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1)
         (make-token 'A 2))
@result{} (1 2)

;;Parse the sequence: A A A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1)
         (make-token 'A 2)
         (make-token 'A 3))
@result{} (1 2 3)

;;Parse the sequence: *eoi*
(example)
@result{} 0
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Accepting a sequence of arbitrary length

The following parser defines a grammar which accepts a sequence of
@samp{A} tokens of any length; it also accepts @samp{*eoi*} alone.

@example
(define (example . tokens)
  (let* ((lexer        (make-lexer tokens))
         (make-parser  (lalr-parser
                         :output-value #t
                         :terminals '(A)
                         :rules '((e (e A) : $2
                                     (A)   : $1
                                     ()    : 0))))
         (parser       (make-parser)))
    (parser lexer error-handler)))

;;Parse the sequence: *eoi*
(example)
@result{} 0

;;Parse the sequence: A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1))
@result{} 1

;;Parse the sequence: A A A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1)
         (make-token 'A 2)
         (make-token 'A 3))
@result{} 3
@end example

@noindent
in the last test example, notice that the parser's return value is the
value of the last parsed token (@samp{3}), while the other values are
discarded.  This is because the whole sequence matches the right--hand
side rule @samp{(e A)} and its semantic clause is @samp{$2}, which is
the value of the token matching the last terminal @samp{A}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Returning all the values from an arbitrary sequence

If we want all the values in the sequence we can use the following
parser:

@example
(define (example . tokens)
  (let* ((lexer        (make-lexer tokens))
         (make-parser  (lalr-parser
                         :output-value #t
                         :terminals '(A)
                         :rules '((e (e A) : (cons $2 $1)
                                     (A)   : (list $1)
                                     ()    : 0))))
         (parser       (make-parser)))
    (parser lexer error-handler)))

;;Parse the sequence: *eoi*
(example)
@result{} 0

;;Parse the sequence: A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1))
@result{} (1)

;;Parse the sequence: A A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1)
         (make-token 'A 2))
@result{} (2 1)

;;Parse the sequence: A A A *eoi*
(example (make-token 'A 1)
         (make-token 'A 2)
         (make-token 'A 3))
@result{} (3 2 1)
@end example

@noindent
we notice that the values are returned in reverse order; this is
because, making the semantic clauses explicit, the following are
equivalent:

@example
(cons 2 (list 1))

(example (make-token 'A 1)
         (make-token 'A 2))
@end example

@noindent
and also the following:

@example
(cons 3 (cons 2 (list 1)))

(example (make-token 'A 1)
         (make-token 'A 2)
         (make-token 'A 3))
@end example

@noindent
in more detail, when parsing the sequence @samp{A A *eoi*} we can
imagine the following stacks:

@example
#(#f  1  2  #<eof>)
#(S   A  A   *eoi*)
  |
  p
@end example

@noindent
the first lookahead returns @samp{A} and the action is shift:

@example
#(#f  1  2  #<eof>)
#(S   A  A   *eoi*)
      |
      p
@end example

@noindent
the second lookahead returns @samp{A} and the action is reduce:

@example
#(#f  (1)  2  #<eof>)
#(S    e   A   *eoi*)
       |
       p
@end example

@noindent
the third lookahead returns @samp{A} and the action is shift:

@example
#(#f  (1)  2  #<eof>)
#(S    e   A   *eoi*)
           |
           p
@end example

@noindent
the fourth lookahead returns @samp{A} and the action is reduce:

@example
#(#f  (2 . (1))  #<eof>  #f)
#(S    e          *eoi*  #f)
       |
       p
@end example

@noindent
and we know that @samp{(2 . (1))} is @samp{(2 1)}; the fifth lookahead
returns @samp{*eoi*} and the action is accept.

@c page
@node lalr glr
@section Generalised LR parsing


GLR parsing (which stands for Generalized LR parsing) is an extension of
the traditional LR parsing technique to handle highly ambiguous
grammars.  It is especially interesting for natural language processing,
the context in which the technique has been devised.

To generate a GLR parser instead of a regular LALR parser, simply use
the @samp{:parser-type 'glr} option with @func{lalr-parser}.

GLR parsers are run in exactly the same way as regular LALR parsers; the
only difference is that the result of the parsing is a (possibly empty)
list of parses instead of a single parse.

Since the parsing of a phrase can lead to many potential parses, errors
cannot be detected as easily as with deterministic LR parsing.  For this
reason, it is advised to not put error productions in the grammar (they
will be ignored anyway).  Moreover, GLR parsers are usually not meant
for interactive parsers.

@c page
@node packrat
@chapter Packrat parser


The @library{packrat} library implements parsing combinators using the
Packrat parsing algorithm: A memoizing, backtracking, recursive descent
parsing technique that runs in time and space linear in the size of the
input text.

The library makes use of the @class{lexical-token} and
@class{source-location} record types.  @ref{parser-tools, Lexer and
parser utilities}.  When first experimenting with it, we sould import
the library with the following directive:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (prefix (packrat) packrat:))
@end example

@noindent
to avoid imported bindings name conflicts.

@menu
* packrat intro::               Introduction to the algorithm.
* packrat calc::                Calculator example.
* packrat types::               Parser state and results.
* packrat comb::                Combinators.
@end menu

@c page
@node packrat intro
@section Introduction to the algorithm


For a generic introduction to parsers, see the tutorial for the
@library{lalr} library.  @ref{lalr intro, Introduction to the LR parser}

@menu
* packrat intro state::         Handling the parser state.
* packrat intro comb::          Combinator functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node packrat intro state
@subsection Handling the parser state


The parser state is represented by a linked list of @class{state}
records, terminated by a thunk which, if evaluated, returns the next
@class{state} record in the list, already chained.  The list is
@strong{not} a Scheme list.

@example
 -----------
|  <state>  |
|           |
| lookahead +--> #<first lexical-token>
|           |
|   next    |
 -----+-----
      |
      v
 -----------
|  <state>  |
|           |
| lookahead +--> #<second lexical-token>
|           |
|    next   +--
 -----------
      |
      v
 -----------
|  <state>  |
|           |
| lookahead +--> #<third lexical-token>
|           |
|    next   +
 -----------
      |
      v
 #<procedure>
@end example

Each @class{state} record represents the sequence of subsequent tokens
drawn from the lexer.  By keeping a referenct to a @class{state} record,
we can reparse the same sequence any number of times; this is used to
backtrack from a state to a previous one.

@c page
@node packrat intro comb
@subsection Combinator functions


A @dfn{combinator} is a function accepting a single @class{state} record
as argument and returning a @class{success} or @class{error} record.
The returned record is generated by analysing the token in the
@class{state} record; a combinator consuming a single token looks like
this:

@example
(define (combinator state)
  (let* ((token (<state>-lookahead state))
         (value (some-operation token)))
    (if value
        (make-<success> state value)
      (make-<error> state "an error description"))))
@end example

@noindent
notice that both the @class{success} and @class{error} records keep
references to the @class{state} record used to generate them.  A
combinator analysing three tokens looks like this:

@example
(define (combinator state-1)
  (let* ((state-2 (next-state state-1))
         (state-3 (next-state state-2))
         (token-1 (<state>-lookahead state-1))
         (token-2 (<state>-lookahead state-2))
         (token-3 (<state>-lookahead state-3))
         (value (some-operation token-1 token-2 token-3)))
    (if value
        (make-<success> state-3 value)
      (make-<error> state-3 "an error description"))))
@end example

@noindent
here the returned record keeps a reference to the @strong{last}
@class{state} record used to generate it; this means that given the
result of a combinator application, we can access the deepest parser
@class{state} and so continue parsing from there.

Often we chain combinator functions so the second combinator is applied
only if the first one succeeds:

@example
(define (first state)
  (let* ((token (<state>-lookahead state))
         (value (some-operation token)))
    (if value
        (second (next-state state))
      (make-<error> state "an error description"))))

(define (second state)
  (let* ((token (<state>-lookahead state))
         (value (some-operation token)))
    (if value
        (make-<success> state value)
      (make-<error> state "an error description"))))

(first init-state)
@end example

@noindent
notice how @func{first} takes care of generating a new @class{state}
record with @func{next-state}.

There are many ways, and so much freedom, in composing combinators to
parse the tokens.  @library{packrat} provides a handful of standard ways
to compose client supplied combinators.

@c page
@node packrat calc
@section Calculator example


The following example implements a simple arithmetics calculator.  First
let's see an S--expressions lexer; the parser expects a lexer closure
returning records of type @class{lexical-token} having terminal category
symbols in the set:

@example
NUMBER OPEN-PAREN CLOSE-PAREN + - * /
@end example

@noindent
the lexer first converts an S--expression into a list of pairs:

@example
(sexp->stream '(1 + 2 + 3))
@result{} ((NUMBER . 1)
    (+)
    (NUMBER . 2)
    (+)
    (NUMBER . 3))

(sexp->stream '((1 + 2) * 3))
@result{} ((OPEN-PAREN)
    (NUMBER . 1)
    (+)
    (NUMBER . 2)
    (CLOSE-PAREN)
    (*)
    (NUMBER . 3))
@end example

@noindent
notice that @samp{(NUMBER . 3)} is a token representation with terminal
category @samp{NUMBER} and semantic value @samp{3}; also, @samp{(+)} is
a token representation with terminal category @samp{+} and semantic
value null.

@example
(define (sexp->stream sexp)
  (define (lexer sexp)
    (let loop ((sexp   (if (pair? sexp)
                           sexp
                         (list sexp)))
               (result '()))
      (if (null? sexp)
          result
        (let ((atom (car sexp)))
          (loop (cdr sexp)
                (cond ((number? atom)
                       `((NUMBER . ,atom) . ,result))
                      ((memq atom '(+ - * /))
                       `((,atom) . ,result))
                      ((pair? atom)
                       (append '((CLOSE-PAREN))
                               (lexer atom)
                               '((OPEN-PAREN))
                               result))
                      (else
                       (error #f "invalid token" atom))))))))
  (reverse (lexer sexp)))
@end example

Then let's see the lexer closure; it takes an S--expression and returns
a thunk which, when evaluated, returns records of type
@class{lexical-token}.  The source location field is set to @false{},
because for an S--expression there is no such information available.

@example
(define (make-lexer-closure sexp)
  (let ((stream (sexp->stream sexp)))
    (lambda ()
      (if (null? stream)
          (make-<lexical-token> '*eoi* #f (eof-object) 0)
        (let ((token (car stream)))
          (set! stream (cdr stream))
          (make-<lexical-token> (car token) #f
                                (cdr token) 0))))))
@end example

Finally the parser definition; it defines the following non--terminal
symbols:

@table @samp
@item expr
It is the start symbol and represents a general arithmetic expression.

@item mul-expr
It represents a multiplication, a division or a subexpression.  It is
subordinate to @samp{expr} to allow multiplication and division to have
precedence over addition and subtraction.  Also, it allows parenthesised
subexpressions to be evaluated first.

@item simple
It represents subexpressions.  It includes: simple numbers; negated
expressions; expressions preceeded by a standalone plus sign;
parenthesised subexpressions.
@end table

The @func{make-grammar-combinator} macro returns a combinator function
which can be used any number of times to parse S--expressions.

@example
(define calc
  (make-grammar-combinator
    expr

    (expr     ((a <- mul-expr '+ b <- expr)
               (+ a b))
              ((a <- mul-expr '- b <- expr)
               (- a b))
              ((a <- mul-expr)
               a))

    (mul-expr ((a <- simple '* b <- simple)
               (* a b))
              ((a <- simple '/ b <- simple)
               (/ a b))
              ((a <- simple)
               a))

    (simple   ((a <- 'NUMBER)
               a)
              (('+ a <- expr)
               a)
              (('- a <- expr)
               (- a))
              (('OPEN-PAREN a <- expr 'CLOSE-PAREN)
               a))))
@end example

@noindent
typical usage of the interface is represented by the following function:

@example
(define (doit sexp)
  (let* ((lexer   (make-lexer-closure sexp))
         (result  (calc (initialise-state lexer))))
    (if (<success>? result)
        (<result>-value result)
      (<error>-message result))))
@end example

@noindent
it works like this:

@example
(doit 1)
@result{} 1

(doit '(+ 1))
@result{} 1

(doit '(- 1))
@result{} -1

(doit '(- - + + - + 1))
@result{} -1

(doit '(1 * 2 - 3))
@result{} -1

(doit '((1 + 2) * 3))
@result{} 9

(doit '(+ *))
@result{} "expected token with category OPEN-PAREN"
@end example

@noindent
there are ways to return better error messages.

@c page
@node packrat types
@section Parser state and results


@menu
* packrat types state::         The parser state.
* packrat types result::        Combinators results.
@end menu

@c page
@node packrat types state
@subsection The parser state


@deftp {Record Type} <state>
Represents the state of the parser at a specific point in the input
stream.  Records of this type are the argument for the combinator
functions.  Fields description follows:

@table @samp
@item lookahead
A @class{lexical-token} record from the input stream.  It is the first
token examined by combinators.  This field is immutable.

@item next-state
A @class{state} record or a thunk returning a @class{state} record.  It
represents the next state generated by parsing the token in the
@samp{lookahead} field.  To generate a new state we must do:

@example
(let* ((state ---)
       (next  (<state>-next-state state)))
  (if (<state>? next)
      next
    (next)))
@end example

@noindent
or just call @func{next-state}.

@item memoized-results
An alist mapping symbol keywords to @class{result} records; it
represents the result of applying a combinator to this record.  Each
memoizing combinator must have a unique symbol associated to it, to be
used as keyword for this alist.

Only combinators generated by @func{make-memoize-combinator} access this
field.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun <state>? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{state}.
@end defun


@defun <state>-lookahead @var{state}
@defunx <state>-next-state @var{state}
@defunx <state>-memoized-results @var{state}
Field accessors.
@end defun


@defun initialise-state @var{lexer}
Return a @class{state} record representing the whole input stream
generated by @var{lexer}.  @var{lexer} must be a thunk returning
@class{lexical-token} records.
@end defun


@defun next-state @var{state}
Return a @class{state} record representing the input stream after the
token in @var{state}, which must be a @class{state} record.
@end defun


@defun pushback @var{token} @var{state}
Return a @class{state} record representing the input stream
@strong{before} the token in @var{state}, which must be a @class{state}
record.  It can be used to fake reading tokens from the input.
@end defun


@defun memoize-result @var{keyword} @var{result} @var{state}
Memoize the @class{result} record @var{result} in the @class{state}
record @var{state}, associating it to @var{keyword} which must be a
Scheme symbol.
@end defun

@c page
@node packrat types result
@subsection Combinators results


@deftp {Record Type} <result>
Base type for the return value of the combinator functions.  It is an
``abstract'' type, meaning that it is incorrect to instantiate it
directly.  Fields description follows:

@table @samp
@item state
Immutable field holding the @class{state} record to which a combinator
was applied to generate this result.
@end table
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type} <success>
Record type derived from @class{result}; it represents the successful
application of a combinator to a @class{state} record.  Fields
description follows:

@table @samp
@item value
An immutable field holding the semantic value generated by the
combinator application.
@end table
@end deftp


@deftp {Record Type} <error>
Record type derived from @class{result}; it represents the failed
application of a combinator to a @class{state} record.  Fields
description follows:

@table @samp
@item message
An immutable field holding a Scheme string describing the error.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-<success> @var{state} @var{value}
@defunx make-<error> @var{state} @var{error-message}
Record constructors.
@end defun


@defun <result>? @var{obj}
@defunx <success>? @var{obj}
@defunx <error>? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{result},
@class{success} or @class{error}.
@end defun


@defun <result>-state @var{result}
@defunx <success>-value @var{success}
@defunx <error>-message @var{error}
Field accessors.
@end defun

@c page
@node packrat comb
@section Combinators


The @dfn{parsing combinators} are functions taking as argument a
@class{parser-state} record and returning a @class{parse-result} record.
Each combinator attempts to parse the input stream in some manner; the
result of the combinator is either a successful parse with an associated
semantic value, or a failed parse with an associated @samp{parse-error}
record.

@library{packrat} provides a set of combinator makers which can be used
to generate commonly used combinator procedures.

@menu
* packrat comb terminal::       Expecting a token category.
* packrat comb sequence::       Applying combinators in sequence.
* packrat comb or::             Applying alternative combinators.
* packrat comb unless::         Applying failure combinators.
* packrat comb memoize::        Memozing combinators.
* packrat comb error::          Returning error results.
* packrat comb grammar::        The grammar combinator.
@end menu

@c page
@node packrat comb terminal
@subsection Expecting a token category


One of the most common operations is to verify that the next token
belongs to a specific category; basically, a combinator matching a token
with category @samp{NUMBER} should look like this:

@example
(lambda (state)
  (let ((token (<state>-lookahead state)))
    (if (eq? 'NUMBER (<lexical-token>-category token))
        (make-<success> state (<lexical-token>-value token))
      (make-<error> state "expected NUMBER token"))))
@end example

@noindent
we want a method to generate such combinators with the category as
parameter.


@defun make-terminal-combinator @var{category} @var{acceptor}
Return a combinator which, if the next token has category @func{eq?} to
@var{category}, applies the procedure @var{acceptor} to its semantic
value.  The result of this application must be a combinator, which is
applied to the @class{state} record representing the remainder of the
input stream.
@end defun


The following example defines a combinator which checks that the next
token has category @samp{NUMBER} and, if successful, returns a
@samp{success} record.  The acceptor discards the semantic value and
returns a combinator which just builds a @class{success} record.

@example
(define comb
  (make-terminal-combinator 'NUMBER
    (lambda (semantic-value)
      (lambda (state)
        (make-<success> state semantic-value)))))
@end example

The following example defines combinators which check that the next two
tokens have category @samp{A} and @samp{B} and, if successful, return a
@samp{success} record holding the semantic value of the second.

@example
(define comb-a
  (make-terminal-combinator 'A
    (lambda (semantic-value)
      comb-b)))

(define comb-b
  (make-terminal-combinator 'B
    (lambda (semantic-value)
      (lambda (state)
        (make-<success> state semantic-value)))))
@end example

The following example defines a combinator which checks that the next
two tokens have category @samp{NUMBER} and, if successful, returns a
@samp{success} record holding the sum of the semantic values; the second
combinator is dynamically generated:

@example
(define comb
  (make-terminal-combinator 'NUMBER
    (lambda (a)
      (make-terminal-combinator 'NUMBER
        (lambda (b)
          (lambda (state)
            (make-<success> state (+ a b))))))))
@end example

@c page
@node packrat comb sequence
@subsection Applying combinators in sequence.


One of the most common operations is to apply a combinator to a
@class{state} record and, if success, apply another one to the new
state; basically, ``application if success'' goes like this:

@example
(define comb-a
  (lambda (state)
    ---))

(define comb-b
  (lambda (state)
    ---))

(lambda (state)
  (let ((result (comb-a state)))
    (if (<success>? result)
        (comb-b (<result>-state result))
      result)))
@end example

@noindent
we want a method to generate such a combinator with the sequenced
combinators as parameters.


@defun make-sequence-combinator @var{combinator} @var{acceptor}
Return a new combinator which applies @var{combinator} to the state and,
if successful, hands the resulting semantic value to the procedure
@var{acceptor}.  The result of this application must be a combinator,
which is applied to the @class{state} record representing the remainder
of the input stream.
@end defun


The following example defines a sequence combinator which checks if the
next two tokens have categories @samp{A} and @samp{B}:

@example
(define comb-a
  (make-terminal-combinator 'A
    (lambda (semantic-value)
      (lambda (state)
        (make-<success> state semantic-value)))))

(define comb-b
  (make-terminal-combinator 'B
    (lambda (semantic-value)
      (lambda (state)
        (make-<success> state semantic-value)))))

(define comb
  (make-sequence-combinator comb-a
    (lambda (discarded) comb-b)))
@end example

The following example defines a combinator which checks that the next
two tokens have category @samp{NUMBER} and, if successful, returns a
@samp{success} record holding the sum of the semantic values; the second
combinator is dynamically generated:

@example
(define comb
  (packrat:make-sequence-combinator
       (packrat:make-terminal-combinator 'NUMBER
          (lambda (a)
            (lambda (state)
              (packrat:make-<success> state a))))
    (lambda (a)
      (packrat:make-terminal-combinator 'NUMBER
         (lambda (b)
           (lambda (state)
             (packrat:make-<success> state (+ a b))))))))
@end example

@c page
@node packrat comb or
@subsection Applying alternative combinators


A common operation is to apply a combinator when another one has already
failed to match the input; basically, it is like this:

@example
(define comb-a
  (lambda (state)
    ---))

(define comb-b
  (lambda (state)
    ---))

(lambda (state)
  (let ((result (comb-a state)))
    (if (<success>? result)
        result
      (comb-b state))))
@end example

@noindent
we want a method to generate such a combinator with the alternative
combinators as parameters.


@defun make-or-combinator @vari{combinator} @varii{combinator}
Return a new combinator which applies @vari{combinator} to the state,
only trying @varii{combinator} if the first fails.  If both the
combinators fail, the return value is the return value of
@varii{combinator}.
@end defun


The following example defines an OR combinator which matches if the next
token has category @samp{A} or @samp{B}:

@example
(define comb-a
  (make-terminal-combinator 'A
    (lambda (semantic-value)
      (lambda (state)
        (make-<success> state semantic-value)))))

(define comb-b
  (make-terminal-combinator 'B
    (lambda (semantic-value)
      (lambda (state)
        (make-<success> state semantic-value)))))

(define comb
  (make-or-combinator comb-a comb-b))
@end example

The following example defines an OR combinator which is used to generate
a specific error message:

@example
(define comb
  (make-or-combinator
     (make-terminal-combinator 'A
       (lambda (semantic-value)
         (lambda (state)
           (make-<success> state semantic-value))))
     (lambda (state)
       (make-<error> state "it is not A, dammit!"))))
@end example

@c page
@node packrat comb unless
@subsection Applying failure combinators


It is possible to assert that a particular sequence of tokens does
@strong{not} in the current state of the parser; it goes like this:

@example
(define comb-a
  (lambda (state)
    ---))

(define comb-b
  (lambda (state)
    ---))

(lambda (state)
  (let ((result (comb-a state)))
    (if (<error>? result)
        (comb-b (<result>-state result))
      (make-<error> state "unexpected match"))))
@end example

@noindent
we want a method to generate such a combinator with the combinators as
parameters.


@defun make-unless-combinator @vari{combinator} @varii{combinator}
Return a new combinator which applies @vari{combinator} to the state
and, if error, applies @varii{combinator} to the @class{state} record
representing the remainder of the input stream.
@end defun

@c page
@node packrat comb memoize
@subsection Memozing combinators


It is possible to memoize the result of applying a combinator into the
@class{state} record itself; simplifying, it goes like this:

@example
(define comb
  (lambda (state)
    ---))

(lambda (state)
  (let ((results-alist (<state>-memoized-results state)))
    (cond ((assq 'keyword (<state>-state state)) => cdr)
          (else
           (begin0-let ((result (comb state))
             (memoize-result 'keyword result state)))))))
@end example

@noindent
if a result has been already computed for the state and the
@samp{keyword}, than that result is returned, else the combinator is
applied; we want a method to generate such a combinator with the
combinators as parameters.


@defun make-memoize-combinator @var{keyword} @var{combinator}
Return a new combinator which first searches @var{keyword} in the
results map of the state:

@itemize
@item
If it is found, return the associated @class{result} record.

@item
Else applies @var{combinator} to the state, memoizes the result then
returns it.
@end itemize

@var{keyword} is the key associated to the result in the @class{state}
record, it must be a value comparable with @func{eq?}.

The memoize combinator detects a left--recursive attempt to evaluate
@var{combinator} and in this case raises an assertion violation.
@end defun

@c page
@node packrat comb error
@subsection Returning error results


@defun make-error-combinator @var{error-message}
Return a new combinator which returns an @class{error} record with
@var{error-message} in the @samp{message} field.  The error combinator
can be used to end a sequence, which is known to be invalid, with a
descriptive error message.
@end defun




@c page
@node packrat comb grammar
@subsection The grammar combinator


@deffn Syntax make-grammar-combinator @ameta{start} @ameta{nonterminal} ...
Provide syntactic sugar for building complex parser combinators from
simpler combinators.  Each @meta{nonterminal} must be like this:

@example
@cmeta{nonterminal} -> (@cmeta{identifier} @cmeta{rule}*)

@cmeta{rule} -> (@cmeta{sequence} @cmeta{semantic-clause})

@cmeta{sequence} -> (@cmeta{part}*)
           |  (@cmeta{part}* :error @cmeta{message})
           |  (@cmeta{part}* :exception)

@cmeta{part} -> (:not @cmeta{part}*)
       |  @cmeta{var} <- (quote @cmeta{terminal})
       |  @cmeta{var} <- @cmeta{identifier}
       |  @cmeta{var} <- :source-location
       |  (quote @cmeta{terminal})
       |  @cmeta{identifier}
@end example

@noindent
and it expands into a combinator:

@example
(make-memoize-combinator (quote @cmeta{identifier})
  (lambda (state)
    ---))
@end example

@noindent
each non--terminal combinator is bound by a @func{letrec*} form to the
respective @meta{identifier}:

@example
(letrec* ((@cmeta{identifier} (make-memoize-combinator ---))
          ...)
  @cmeta{start})
@end example

@noindent
the last expression in the body of the generated @func{letrec*} is
@meta{start}, which can be any expression but must evaluate to a
combinator function.  The simplest @meta{start} is an @meta{identifier},
which causes the macro to return the combinator bound to it.

Since @func{begin} forms within @func{letrec*} forms are flattened: By
making @meta{start} a @func{begin} form we can introduce bindings to
hand--written combinators which can call (and can be called by) the
non--terminal combinators.

Each @meta{sequence} expands into a combinator; when the combinator
returned by @meta{start} is applied to a @class{state} record, it
attempts to match the input tokens against the @meta{sequence}
combinators in its @meta{rule}.  The first @meta{rule} is tried first,
then the second and so on, stopping at the first match.  If matching is
successful, a @class{success} record is returned; else an @class{error}
record is returned.

Each @meta{part} expands to a combinator which, if successful in
matching tokens from the input returns a @class{success} record, else
returns an @class{error} record.  Each @meta{part} combinator invokes
the combinator generated by its subsequent @meta{part}; the first
@meta{part} combinator of a @meta{sequence} is invoked by the
@meta{sequence} combinator; the last @meta{part} combinator of a
@meta{sequence} must generate a @class{result} record by itself.

If a @meta{part} combinator, which is not the last in a @meta{sequence},
matches one or more tokens: It must call @func{next-state} to generate a
new @class{state} record and hand it to the next @meta{part} combinator.

If all the @meta{part} combinators in a @meta{sequence} match the
tokens, a @class{success} record is generated by the last one and
returned.  The @class{success} record is registered in the memoized
results of the @class{state} record that started a non--terminal match,
using @meta{identifier} as keyword.

If a @meta{sequence} combinator matches, but its last @meta{part} is
@samp{:error}, an @class{error} record is returned and registered in the
memoized results of the @class{state} record that started the
non--terminal match, using @meta{identifier} as keyword.

If a @meta{sequence} matches, but its last @meta{part} is
@samp{:exception}, a continuable exception is raised.

If a @meta{part} fails to match: An @class{error} record is generated
and returned.  The @class{error} record is registered in the memoized
results of the @class{state} record that started the non--terminal
mismatch, using @meta{identifier} as keyword.

The @meta{part} elements can be of the following forms.

@table @samp
@item (quote @cmeta{terminal})
Matches if the lookahead token has category @func{eq?} to
@meta{terminal}; the semantic value of the token is discarded.  Consume
one token.  This @meta{part} makes use of a combinator generated by
@func{make-terminal-combinator}.

@item @cmeta{var} <- (quote @cmeta{terminal})
Matches if the lookahead token has category @func{eq?} to
@meta{terminal}; bind the token's semantic value to @meta{var} and
continue parsing; the subsequent combinators are evaluated in the
augmented environment.  Consume one token.  This @meta{part} makes use
of a combinator generated by @func{make-terminal-combinator}.

@item @cmeta{identifier}
Apply the combinator bound to @meta{identifier} to the current state.
The applied combinator may consume any number of tokens.

@item @cmeta{var} <- @cmeta{identifier}
Apply the combinator bound to @meta{identifier} to the current state.
If successful, bind the resulting semantic value to @meta{var}; the
subsequent combinators are evaluated in the augmented environment.  The
applied combinator may consume any number of tokens.

@item (:not @cmeta{fail-part} ...)
Matches if the lookahead tokens do not match the @meta{fail-part}
elements.  This @meta{part} makes use of a combinator generated by
@func{make-unless-combinator}.

@item @cmeta{var} <- :source-location
Bind the @class{source-location} record in the lookahead token to
@cmeta{var}; the subsequent combinators are evaluated in the augmented
environement.  Consumes no tokens.  This can be used to annotate
abstract syntax trees with source location informations.

@item :error @cmeta{message}
Matches only as last @meta{part} of a @meta{sequence} and consumes no
tokens.  Return an @class{error} record using @cmeta{message} as value
for the @samp{message} field.

@item :exception
Matches only as last @meta{part} of a @meta{sequence} and consumes no
tokens.  The @meta{semantic-clause} of the @meta{rule} is evaluated and
it must return a condition object, which is handed to
@func{raise-continuable}.  If the exception handler returns, it must
return a @class{result} record.  @ref{stdlib exceptions conditions,
Conditions}
@end table
@end deffn

@c page
@node csv
@chapter Comma--separated value (@acronym{CSV}) utilities


The @library{csv} library provides lexers and parsers to read data from
``comma--separated value'' (@csv{}) files.  This format is not well
defined, so the library provides both high level parsers and low level
lexers that can be customised to fit specific needs.

@menu
* csv lexer::                   Low level tokenisation.
* csv parser::                  High level parsing.
@end menu

@c page
@node csv lexer
@section Low level tokenisation


The @library{csv} library is built upon the @library{silex} library, and
it makes available directly the lexer tables.  @ref{silex, A lexical
analyser generator}


@deffn Constant csv-unquoted-data-table
The table used to tokenise data outside of strings.  This binding is
exported by the @library{csv unquoted-data-lexer} library.

This table can be rebuilt from the source @file{unquoted-data.l} in the
@file{src/libraries/csv} directory of the source distribution, with:

@example
(lex :input-file   "unquoted-data.l"
     :output-file  "unquoted-data-lexer.sls"
     :library-spec '(csv unquoted-data-lexer)
     :table-name   'csv-unquoted-data-table
     :counters     'all)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Constant csv-unquoted-data-table/comma
The table used to tokenise data outside of strings, using the comma
character as fields separator.  This binding is exported by the
@library{csv unquoted-data-comma-lexer} library.

This table can be rebuilt from the source @file{unquoted-data-comma.l}
in the @file{src/libraries/csv} directory of the source distribution,
with:

@example
(lex :input-file   "unquoted-data-comma.l"
     :output-file  "unquoted-data-comma-lexer.sls"
     :library-spec '(csv unquoted-data-comma-lexer)
     :table-name   'csv-unquoted-data-table/comma
     :counters     'all)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Constant csv-strings-table
The table used to tokenise strings.  This binding is exported by
the @library{csv strings-lexer} library.

This table can be rebuilt from the source @file{strings.l} in the
@file{src/libraries/csv} directory of the source distribution, with:

@example
(lex :input-file   "strings.l"
     :output-file  "strings-lexer.sls"
     :library-spec '(csv strings-lexer)
     :table-name   'csv-strings-table
     :counters     'all)
@end example
@end deffn



@menu
* csv lexer strings::           Tokenising strings.
* csv lexer unquoted-data::     Tokenising unquoted data.
* csv lexer full::              Full parsing.
@end menu

@c page
@node csv lexer strings
@subsection Tokenising strings


The @library{csv} library defines strings in a @csv{} file as sequences
of characters enclosed in double--quotes @samp{"}.  Inside a string a
double double--quote @samp{""} is interpreted as a single double--quote.

To tokenise a string means to convert a string into the sequence of
characters in it; this is done by a lexer using
@samp{csv-strings-table}.  This table is meant to be used after the
opening double--quote has been tokenised, and it will consume all the
characters up to, and including, the closing double--quote.

When the lexer finds the closing double--quote it returns @false{}, else
it returns the next character.  We can take advantage of this to
tokenise strings as follows:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (silex lexer)
  (csv strings-lexer))

(define (tokenise string)
  (let* ((IS    (lexer-make-IS :string string :counters 'all))
         (lexer (lexer-make-lexer csv-strings-table IS)))
    (do ((token (lexer) (lexer))
         (ell   '()))
        ((not token)
         (reverse ell))
      (set! ell (cons token ell)))))

;;All the test strings must end with a \" to signal
;;the end-of-string to the strings lexer.

(tokenise "\"")
@result{} ()

(tokenise "abcd\"")
@result{} (#\a #\b #\c #\d)

; Quoted double-quote.
(tokenise "ab\"\"cd\"")
@result{} (#\a #\b #\" #\c #\d)

; Nested string.
(tokenise "ab \"\"ciao\"\" cd\"")
@result{} (#\a #\b #\space #\" #\c #\i #\a #\o #\" #\space #\c #\d)

; Stop reading at the ending double-quote.
(tokenise "ab\"cd")
@result{} (#\a #\b)
@end example

@noindent
notice that the input system has to be created with @samp{:counters
'all}.  If we want to rebuild the string, we can do it as follows:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (silex lexer)
  (csv strings-lexer))

(define (tokenise string)
  (let* ((IS    (lexer-make-IS :string string))
         (lexer (lexer-make-lexer csv-strings-table IS)))
    (let-values (((port the-string) (open-string-output-port)))
      (do ((token (lexer) (lexer)))
          ((not token)
           (the-string))
        (write-char token port)))))

;;All the test strings must end with a \" to signal
;;the end of string to the strings lexer.

(tokenise "\"")
@result{} ""

(tokenise "abcd\"")
@result{} "abcd"

; Quoted double-quote.
(tokenise "ab\"\"cd\"")
@result{} "ab\"cd"

; Nested string.
(tokenise "ab \"\"ciao\"\" cd\"")
@result{} "ab \"ciao\" cd"

; Stop reading at the ending double-quote.
(tokenise "ab\"cd")
@result{} "ab"
@end example

@c page
@node csv lexer unquoted-data
@subsection Tokenising unquoted data


The @library{csv} library defines unquoted data as everything that is
not inside a string.  The lexer built around
@samp{csv-unquoted-data-table} will return:

@itemize
@item
The symbol @samp{eol} to represent the end of a line.  Every sequence of
any number of @samp{#\newline} and @samp{#\return} characters, in any
order, is collapsed to a single end--of--line.

@item
The symbol @samp{string} to represent the start of a string.  It is
returned when the lexer finds a @samp{"} character.

@item
In any other case the next character from the input system.
@end itemize

The @samp{csv-unquoted-data-table/comma} works the same, with the
following difference in the return values:

@itemize
@item
The symbol @samp{field} when the token is a comma character.
@end itemize


We can take advantage of this to tokenise unquoted data as follows:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (silex lexer)
  (csv unquoted-data-lexer))

(define (tokenise string)
  (let* ((IS    (lexer-make-IS :string string :counters 'all))
         (lexer (lexer-make-lexer csv-unquoted-data-table IS)))
    (do ((token (lexer) (lexer))
         (ell   '()))
        ((or (not token) (eq? token 'string))
         (reverse ell))
      (set! ell (cons token ell)))))

(tokenise "alpha, beta")
@result{} (#\a #\l #\p #\h #\a #\, #\space #\b #\e #\t #\a)

; End of line
(tokenise "alpha\nbeta")
@result{} (#\a #\l #\p #\h #\a eol #\b #\e #\t #\a)

; End of line
(tokenise "alpha\n\rbeta")
@result{} (#\a #\l #\p #\h #\a eol #\b #\e #\t #\a)

; End of line
(tokenise "alpha\n\r\n\rbeta")
@result{} (#\a #\l #\p #\h #\a eol #\b #\e #\t #\a)

; Read until the string opening.
(tokenise "alpha \"beta")
@result{} (#\a #\l #\p #\h #\a #\space)
@end example

@c page
@node csv lexer full
@subsection Full parsing


Here we see how the high level parsers are implemented.  The following
function makes use of both the string and unquoted--data tables to
convert a @csv{} file into a list of lists, with each sublist
representing a record.  The function @func{csv->list/comma} does no
check for the number of fields on each line.

@smallexample
(define csv->list/comma
  (case-lambda
   ((port)
    (csv->list/comma port (lambda (field) field)))

   ((port swirl-field)
    (let* ((IS            (lexer-make-IS :port port
                                         :counters 'all))
           (string-lexer  (lexer-make-lexer
                            csv-strings-table IS))
           (data-lexer    (lexer-make-lexer
                            csv-unquoted-data-table/comma IS))
           (result        '())
           (record        '()))
      (let-values (((port field) (open-string-output-port)))

        (define (%add-token-to-field token)
          (write-char token port))

        (define (%add-string-to-field)
          (%add-token-to-field #\")
          (do ((token (string-lexer) (string-lexer)))
              ((not token)
               (%add-token-to-field #\"))
            (%add-token-to-field token)))

        (define (%add-field-to-record)
          (set! record (cons (swirl-field (field)) record)))

        (define (%add-record-to-result)
          (set! result (cons (reverse record) result))
          (set! record '()))

        (do ((token (data-lexer) (data-lexer)))
            ((not token)
             (%add-field-to-record)
             (reverse (cons (reverse record) result)))
          (case token

            ((eol)
             (%add-field-to-record)
             (%add-record-to-result))

            ((field)
             (%add-field-to-record))

            ((string)
             (%add-string-to-field))

            (else
             (%add-token-to-field token)))))))))
@end smallexample

Here some examples:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (csv)
  (strings))

; Notice how spaces around commas are preserved.
(csv->list/comma
   (open-string-input-port "alpha, beta, delta
one, two, three"))
@result{} '(("alpha" " beta" " delta")
     ("one" " two" " three"))

; Trim the spaces.
(csv->list/comma
  (open-string-input-port "alpha, beta, delta
one, two, three")
  (lambda (field)
    (string-trim-both field #\space)))
@result{} '(("alpha" "beta" "delta")
     ("one" "two" "three"))
@end example

The following is a variant that allows to specify, via the
@var{separators} argument, custom characters as field separators.

@smallexample
(define csv->list
  (case-lambda
   ((port separators)
    (csv->list port separators (lambda (field) field)))

   ((port separators swirl-field)
    (let* ((IS            (lexer-make-IS :port port
                                         :counters 'all))
           (string-lexer  (lexer-make-lexer
                            csv-strings-table IS))
           (data-lexer    (lexer-make-lexer
                            csv-unquoted-data-table/comma IS))
           (result        '())
           (record        '()))
      (let-values (((port field) (open-string-output-port)))

        (define (%add-token-to-field token)
          (write-char token port))

        (define (%add-string-to-field)
          (%add-token-to-field #\")
          (do ((token (string-lexer) (string-lexer)))
              ((not token)
               (%add-token-to-field #\"))
            (%add-token-to-field token)))

        (define (%add-field-to-record)
          (set! record (cons (swirl-field (field)) record)))

        (define (%add-record-to-result)
          (set! result (cons (reverse record) result))
          (set! record '()))

        (do ((token (data-lexer) (data-lexer)))
            ((not token)
             (%add-field-to-record)
             (reverse (cons (reverse record) result)))
          (cond

            ((eq? 'eol token)
             (%add-field-to-record)
             (%add-record-to-result))

            ((memv token separators)
             (%add-field-to-record))

            ((eq? 'string token)
             (%add-string-to-field))

            (else
             (%add-token-to-field token)))))))))
@end smallexample

@c page
@node csv parser
@section High level parsing


@defun csv->list @var{port} @var{separators}
@defunx csv->list @var{port} @var{separators} @var{swirl-field}
Read a @csv{} file from the textual input @var{port} and convert it into
a list of lists, with each nested list representing a record.

@var{separators} must be a list of characters and used as field
separators in a line.

@var{swirl-field} must be a procedure accepting a single string argument
and returning a string argument.  It is applied to each field string
before adding it to the output list.  This procedure is allowed to raise
an exception.
@end defun


@defun csv->list/comma @var{port}
@defunx csv->list/comma @var{port} @var{swirl-field}
Like @func{csv->list}, but use only the comma as field separator.
@end defun

@c page
@node schelog
@chapter Programming in Schelog


The @library{schelog} library is an embedding of Prolog--style logic
programming in Scheme. ``Embedding'' means we don't lose Scheme: We can
use Prolog--style and conventional Scheme code fragments alongside each
other.  Schelog contains the full repertoire of Prolog features,
including meta--logical and second--order (``set'') predicates, leaving
out only those features that could more easily and more efficiently be
done with Scheme subexpressions.

The library is a port to @rnrs{6} Scheme of Schelog by Dorai Sitaram.
The original code is available at:

@center @url{http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/dorai/schelog/schelog.html}

@c @menu
@c * schelog simple::              Simple goals and queries.
@c * schelog predicates::          Predicates.
@c * schelog scheme::              Using Scheme expressions.
@c @end menu

@c @c page
@c @node schelog simple
@c @section Simple goals and queries


@c Schelog objects are the same as Scheme objects.  However, there are two
@c subsets of these objects that are of special interest to Schelog: goals
@c and predicates.  We will first look at some simple goals.

@c A @dfn{goal} is an object whose truth or falsity we can check.  A goal
@c that turns out to be true is said to succeed.  A goal that turns out to
@c be false is said to fail.

@c Two simple goals that are provided in Schelog are:

@c @example
@c %true
@c %fail
@c @end example

@c The goal @samp{%true} succeeds.  The goal @samp{%fail} always fails.

@c A Schelog user can query a goal by wrapping it in a @samp{%which} form:

@c @example
@c (%which () %true)
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c evaluates to @samp{()}, indicating success, whereas:

@c @example
@c (%which () %fail)
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c evaluates to @false{}, indicating failure.

@c @quotation
@c The second subexpression of the @samp{%which} form is the empty list
@c @samp{()}.  Later, we will see @samp{%whiches} with other lists as the
@c second subform.
@c @end quotation

@c Henceforth, we will use the notation:

@c @example
@c E @result{} F
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c to say that @samp{E} evaluates to @samp{F}.  Thus:

@c @example
@c (%which () %true) @result{} ()
@c @end example

@c @c page
@c @node schelog predicates
@c @section Predicates


@c More interesting goals are created by applying a special kind of Schelog
@c object called a @dfn{predicate} (or relation) to other Schelog objects.
@c Schelog comes with some primitive predicates, such as the arithmetic
@c operators @func{%=:=} and @func{%<}, standing for arithmetic ``equal''
@c and ``less than'' respectively.  For example, the following are some
@c goals involving these predicates:

@c @example
@c (%which () (%=:= 1 1)) @result{} ()
@c (%which () (%< 1 2))   @result{} ()
@c (%which () (%=:= 1 2)) @result{} #f
@c (%which () (%< 1 1))   @result{} #f
@c @end example

@c Other arithmetic predicates are @func{%>} greater than, @func{%<=} less
@c than or equal to, @func{%>=} greater than or equal to, and @func{%=/=}
@c not equal.

@c Schelog predicates are not to be confused with conventional Scheme
@c predicates (such as @func{<} and @func{=}).  Schelog predicates, when
@c applied to arguments, produce goals that may either succeed or fail.
@c Scheme predicates, when applied to arguments, yield a boolean value.
@c Henceforth, we will use the term ``predicate'' to mean Schelog
@c predicates.  Conventional predicates will be explicitly called ``Scheme
@c predicates''.

@c @menu
@c * schelog predicates facts::    Predicates introducing facts.
@c * schelog predicates rules::    Predicates with rules.
@c * schelog predicates goals::    Solving goals.
@c * schelog predicates extra::    Asserting extra clauses.
@c * schelog predicates local::    Local variables.
@c @end menu

@c @c page
@c @node schelog predicates facts
@c @subsection Predicates introducing facts


@c Users can create their own predicates using the Schelog form
@c @func{%rel}.  For example, let's define the predicate @func{%knows}:

@c @example
@c (define %knows
@c   (%rel ()
@c     (('Odysseus 'TeX))
@c     (('Odysseus 'Scheme))
@c     (('Odysseus 'Prolog))
@c     (('Odysseus 'Penelope))
@c     (('Penelope 'TeX))
@c     (('Penelope 'Prolog))
@c     (('Penelope 'Odysseus))
@c     (('Telemachus 'TeX))
@c     (('Telemachus 'calculus))))
@c @end example

@c The expression has the expected meaning.  Each clause in the @func{%rel}
@c establishes a fact: Odysseus knows TeX, Telemachus knows calculus, &c.
@c In general, if we apply the predicate to the arguments in any one of its
@c clauses, we will get a successful goal.  Thus, since @func{%knows} has a
@c clause that reads @samp{(('Odysseus 'TeX))}, the goal @code{(%knows
@c 'Odysseus 'TeX)} will be true.

@c We can now get answers for the following types of queries:

@c @example
@c (%which ()
@c   (%knows 'Odysseus 'TeX))
@c @result{} ()

@c (%which ()
@c   (%knows 'Telemachus 'Scheme))
@c @result{} #f
@c @end example

@c @c page
@c @node schelog predicates rules
@c @subsection Predicates with rules


@c Predicates can be more complicated than the above bald recitation of
@c facts.  The predicate clauses can be rules, eg,

@c @example
@c (define %computer-literate
@c   (%rel (person)
@c     ((person)
@c       (%knows person 'TeX)
@c       (%knows person 'Scheme))
@c     ((person)
@c       (%knows person 'TeX)
@c       (%knows person 'Prolog))))
@c @end example

@c This defines the predicate @func{%computer-literate} in terms of the
@c predicate @func{%knows}.  In effect, a person is defined as
@c computer--literate if they know @samp{TeX} and @samp{Scheme}, or
@c @samp{TeX} and @samp{Prolog}.

@c Note that this use of @func{%rel} employs a local logic variable called
@c @samp{person}.  In general, a @func{%rel} expression can have a list of
@c symbols as its second subform.  These name new logic variables that can
@c be used within the body of the @func{%rel}.

@c The following query can now be answered:

@c @example
@c (%which ()
@c   (%computer-literate 'Penelope))
@c @result{} ()
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c since Penelope knows TeX and Prolog, she is computer--literate.

@c @c page
@c @node schelog predicates goals
@c @subsection Solving goals


@c The above queries are yes/no questions.  Logic programming allows more:
@c We can formulate a goal with uninstantiated logic variables and then ask
@c the querying process to provide, if possible, values for these variables
@c that cause the goal to succeed.  For instance, the query:

@c @example
@c (%which (what)
@c   (%knows 'Odysseus what))
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c asks for an instantiation of the logic variable what that satisfies the
@c goal @code{(%knows 'Odysseus what)}.  In other words, we are asking,
@c ``What does Odysseus know?''

@c Note that this use of @func{%which} (like @func{%rel} in the definition
@c of @func{%computer-literate}) uses a local logic variable, what.  In
@c general, the second subform of @func{%which} can be a list of local
@c logic variables.  The @func{%which} query returns an answer that is a
@c list of bindings, one for each logic variable mentioned in its second
@c subform.  Thus:

@c @example
@c (%which (what)
@c   (%knows 'Odysseus what))
@c @result{} ((what TeX))
@c @end example

@c But that is not all that wily Odysseus knows.  Schelog provides a
@c zero--argument procedure (``thunk'') called @func{%more} that retries
@c the goal in the last @func{%which} query for a different solution.

@c @example
@c (%more) @result{} ((what Scheme))
@c @end example

@c We can keep pumping for more solutions:

@c @example
@c (%more) @result{} ((what Prolog))
@c (%more) @result{} ((what Penelope))
@c (%more) @result{} #f
@c @end example

@c The final @false{} shows that there are no more solutions.  This is
@c because there are no more clauses in the @func{%knows} predicate that
@c list Odysseus as knowing anything else.

@c @quotation
@c It is now clear why @samp{()} was the right choice for truth in the
@c previous yes/no @func{%which} queries that had no logic variables.
@c @func{%which} returns a list of bindings for true goals: The list is
@c empty when there are no variables.
@c @end quotation

@c @c page
@c @node schelog predicates extra
@c @subsection Asserting extra clauses


@c We can add more clauses to a predicate after it has already been defined
@c with a @func{%rel}.  Schelog provides the %assert form for this
@c purpose. Eg,

@c @example
@c (%assert %knows ()
@c   (('Odysseus 'archery)))
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c tacks on a new clause at the end of the existing clauses of the
@c @func{%knows} predicate.  Now, the query:

@c @example
@c (%which (what)
@c   (%knows 'Odysseus what))

@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c gives @samp{TeX}, @samp{Scheme}, @samp{Prolog}, and @samp{Penelope}, as
@c before, but a subsequent @code{(%more)} yields a new result:
@c @samp{archery}.

@c The Schelog form @func{%assert-a} is similar to @func{%assert} but adds
@c clauses before any of the current clauses.

@c Both @func{%assert} and @func{%assert-a} assume that the variable they
@c are adding to, already names a predicate (presumably defined using
@c @func{%rel}).  In order to allow defining a predicate entirely through
@c @func{%asserts}, Schelog provides an empty predicate value
@c @func{%empty-rel}.  @func{%empty-rel} takes any number of arguments and
@c always fails.  A typical use of the @func{%empty-rel} and @func{%assert}
@c combination:

@c @example
@c (define %parent %empty-rel)

@c (%assert %parent ()
@c   (('Laertes 'Odysseus)))

@c (%assert %parent ()
@c   (('Odysseus 'Telemachus))
@c   (('Penelope 'Telemachus)))
@c @end example

@c (Schelog does not provide a predicate for retracting assertions, since
@c we can keep track of older versions of predicates using conventional
@c Scheme features (let and set!).)

@c @c page
@c @node schelog predicates local
@c @subsection Local variables


@c The local logic variables of @func{%rel} and @func{%which} expressions
@c are in reality introduced by the Schelog syntactic form called
@c @func{%let}.  (@func{%rel} and @func{%which} are macros written using
@c @func{%let}.)

@c @func{%let} introduces new lexically scoped logic variables.  Supposing,
@c instead of

@c @example
@c (%which (what)
@c   (%knows 'Odysseus what))
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c we had asked:

@c @example
@c (%let (what)
@c   (%which ()
@c     (%knows 'Odysseus what)))
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c this query, too, succeeds five times, since Odysseus knows five things.
@c However, @func{%which} emits bindings only for the local variables that
@c it introduces.  Thus, this query emits @samp{()} five times before
@c @code{(%more)} finally returns @false{}.

@c @c page
@c @node schelog scheme
@c @section Using Scheme expressions


@c The arguments of Schelog predicates can be any Scheme objects.  In
@c particular, composite structures such as lists, vectors and strings can
@c be used, as also Scheme expressions using the full array of Scheme's
@c construction and decomposition operators.  For instance, consider the
@c following goal:

@c @example
@c (%member x '(1 2 3))
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c here, @func{%member} is a predicate, @samp{x} is a logic variable, and
@c @samp{(1 2 3)} is a structure.  Given a suitably intuitive definition
@c for @func{%member}, the above goal succeeds for @math{x = 1, 2, 3}.

@c Now to defining predicates like @func{%member}:

@c @example
@c (define %member
@c   (%rel (x y xs)
@c     ((x (cons x xs)))
@c     ((x (cons y xs))
@c       (%member x xs))))
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c Ie, @func{%member} is defined with three local variables: @var{x},
@c @var{y}, @var{xs}.  It has two clauses, identifying the two ways of
@c determining membership.

@c The first clause of @func{%member} states a fact: For any @var{x},
@c @var{x} is a member of a list whose head is also @var{x}.

@c The second clause of @func{%member} is a rule: @var{x} is a member of a
@c list if we can show that it is a member of the tail of that list.  In
@c other words, the original @func{%member} goal is translated into a
@c subgoal, which is also a @func{%member} goal.

@c Note that the variable @var{y} in the definition of @func{%member}
@c occurs only once in the second clause.  As such, it doesn't need you to
@c make the effort of naming it.  (Names help only in matching a second
@c occurrence to a first.)  Schelog lets you use the expression @samp{(_)}
@c to denote an anonymous variable.  (Ie, @samp{_} is a thunk that
@c generates a fresh anonymous variable at each call.)  The predicate
@c @func{%member} can be rewritten as:

@c @example
@c (define %member
@c   (%rel (x xs)
@c     ((x (cons x (_))))
@c     ((x (cons (_) xs))
@c       (%member x xs))))
@c @end example

@c @menu
@c * schelog scheme constructor::  Constructors.
@c * schelog scheme is::           The @func{%is} procedure.
@c * schelog scheme lexical::      Lexical scoping.
@c * schelog scheme type::         Type predicates.
@c @end menu

@c @c page
@c @node schelog scheme constructor
@c @subsection Constructors


@c We can use constructors (Scheme procedures for creating structures) to
@c simulate data types in Schelog.  For instance, let's define a
@c natural--number data type where @samp{0} denotes zero, and @samp{(succ
@c x)} denotes the natural number whose immediate predecessor is @var{x}.
@c The constructor @func{succ} can be defined in Scheme as:

@c @example
@c (define succ
@c   (lambda (x)
@c     (vector 'succ x)))
@c @end example

@c Addition and multiplication can be defined as:

@c @example
@c (define %add
@c   (%rel (x y z)
@c     ((0 y y))
@c     (((succ x) y (succ z))
@c       (%add x y z))))

@c (define %times
@c   (%rel (x y z z1)
@c     ((0 y 0))
@c     (((succ x) y z)
@c      (%times x y z1)
@c      (%add y z1 z))))
@c @end example

@c We can do a lot of arithmetic with this in place.  For instance, the
@c factorial predicate looks like:

@c @example
@c (define %factorial
@c   (%rel (x y y1)
@c     ((0 (succ 0)))
@c     (((succ x) y)
@c       (%factorial x y1)
@c       (%times (succ x) y1 y))))
@c @end example

@c @c page
@c @node schelog scheme is
@c @subsection The @func{%is} procedure


@c The above is a very inefficient way to do arithmetic, especially when
@c the underlying language Scheme offers excellent arithmetic facilities
@c (including a comprehensive number ``tower'' and exact rational
@c arithmetic). One problem with using Scheme calculations directly in
@c Schelog clauses is that the expressions used may contain logic variables
@c that need to be dereferenced. Schelog provides the predicate %is that
@c takes care of this. The goal:

@c @example
@c (%is X E)
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c unifies @var{X} with the value of @var{E} considered as a Scheme
@c expression.  @var{E} can have logic variables, but usually they should
@c at least be bound, as unbound variables may not be palatable values to
@c the Scheme operators used in @var{E}.

@c We can now directly use the numbers of Scheme to write a more efficient
@c @func{%factorial} predicate:

@c @example
@c (define %factorial
@c   (%rel (x y x1 y1)
@c     ((0 1))
@c     ((x y) (%is x1 (- x 1))
@c            (%factorial x1 y1)
@c            (%is y (* y1 x)))))
@c @end example

@c A price that this efficiency comes with is that we can use
@c @func{%factorial} only with its first argument already instantiated.  In
@c many cases, this is not an unreasonable constraint.  In fact, given this
@c limitation, there is nothing to prevent us from using Scheme's factorial
@c directly:

@c @example
@c (define %factorial
@c   (%rel (x y)
@c     ((x y)
@c      (%is y (scheme-factorial x 1)))))
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c or better yet, ``in--line'' any calls to @func{%factorial} with
@c @func{%is} expressions calling @func{scheme-factorial}, where the latter
@c is defined in the usual manner:

@c @example
@c (define (scheme-factorial n r)
@c   (if (= n 0)
@c       r
@c     (scheme-factorial (- n 1) (* r n))))
@c @end example

@c @c page
@c @node schelog scheme lexical
@c @subsection Lexical scoping


@c One can use Scheme's lexical scoping to enhance predicate definition.
@c Here is a list--reversal predicate defined using a hidden auxiliary
@c predicate:

@c @example
@c (define %reverse
@c   (letrec
@c     ((revaux
@c        (%rel (x y z w)
@c 	 (('() y y))
@c 	 (((cons x y) z w)
@c 	   (revaux y
@c 	     (cons x z) w)))))
@c     (%rel (x y)
@c       ((x y) (revaux x '() y)))))
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c @code{(revaux X Y Z)} uses @var{y} as an accumulator for reversing
@c @var{x} into @var{z}.  @var{y} starts out as @samp{()}.  Each head of
@c @var{x} is consed on to @var{Y}.  Finally, when @var{x} has wound down
@c to @samp{()}, @var{y} contains the reversed list and can be returned as
@c @var{z}.

@c @noindent
@c @func{revaux} is used purely as a helper predicate for @func{%reverse},
@c and so it can be concealed within a lexical contour.  We use
@c @func{letrec} instead of let because @func{revaux} is a recursive
@c procedure.

@c @c page
@c @node schelog scheme type
@c @subsection Type predicates


@c Schelog provides a couple of predicates that let the user probe the type
@c of objects.  The goal:

@c @example
@c (%constant X)
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c succeeds if @var{x} is an atomic object, ie, not a list or vector.

@c The predicate @func{%compound}, the negation of @func{%constant}, checks
@c if its argument is indeed a list or a vector.

@c The above are merely the logic--programming equivalents of corresponding
@c Scheme predicates.  Users can use the predicate @func{%is} and Scheme
@c predicates to write more type checks in Schelog.  Thus, to test if
@c @var{x} is a string, the following goal could be used:

@c @example
@c (%is #t (string? X))
@c @end example

@c User--defined Scheme predicates, in addition to primitive Scheme
@c predicates, can be thus imported.

@c page
@node email
@chapter Email processing


@menu
* email addresses::             Parsing email addresses.
@end menu

@c page
@node email addresses
@section Parsing email addresses


The @library{email addresses} library implements a lexer and parser for
email addresses.  The parser tries to be compliant to @rfc{} 2822
``Internet Message Format'' (@url{http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2822.txt}).

This library would not exist without the work Peter Simons did for the
C++ library @samp{librfc822} (@url{http://cryp.to/librfc2822/}, @aurl{}
last verified Mon Aug 24, 2009).

@menu
* email addresses components::  Parsed components.
* email addresses types::       Record types.
* email addresses lexer::       Splitting an address into tokens.
* email addresses parser::      Splitting an address into logical units.
@end menu

@c page
@node email addresses components
@subsection Parsed components


The following is an overview of an email address' components.

@table @strong
@item Comments
Comments are strings enclosed in parentheses and may be present at any
point in an address.

@item Domain
A list of strings separated by dots:

@example
alpha.beta.gamma
@result{} domain strings = alpha beta gamma
@end example

@item Domain literal
A dotted quad enclosed in square brackets:

@example
[101.102.103.104]
domain literal @result{} 101.102.103.104
@end example

@item Local part
A list of strings separated by dots:

@example
alpha.beta.gamma
@result{} domain strings = alpha beta gamma
@end example

@item Address specification

@example
marco@@localhost
@result{} local part = marco
@result{} domain     = localhost
@end example

@item Route

@example
@@alpha.it,@@beta.it:
@result{} first domain  = alpha.it
@result{} second domain = beta.it
@end example

@item Route address

@example
<@@alpha.it,@@beta.it:marco@@there.it>
@result{} route      = @@alpha.it,@@beta.it
@result{} local part = marco
@result{} domain     = there.it
@end example

@item Mailbox

@example
"Marco Maggi" <@@alpha.it,@@beta.it:marco@@there.it>
@result{} phrase (quoted literal) = "Marco Maggi"
@result{} route                   = @@alpha.it,@@beta.it
@result{} local part              = marco
@result{} domain                  = there.it

my address <marco@@there.it>
@result{} phrase (atoms)          = my address
@result{} route                   =
@result{} local part              = marco
@result{} domain                  = there.it
@end example

Lists of mailboxes are mailboxes separated by @code{,}:

@example
<marco@@there.it>, <marco@@localhost>, <root@@localhost>
@result{} first mailbox  = <marco@@there.it>
@result{} second mailbox = <marco@@localhost>
@result{} third mailbox  = <root@@localhost>
@end example

@item Group
List of mailboxes enclosed in @samp{: ... ;} with optional phrase:

@example
: marco@@localhost, <marco@@there.com> ;
@result{} phrase         =
@result{} first mailbox  = marco@@localhost
@result{} second mailbox = marco@@there.com

:marco@@localhost, "Marco Maggi" (a comment) <marco@@there.com> ;
@result{} phrase         =
@result{} first mailbox  = marco@@localhost
@result{} second mailbox = "Marco Maggi" <marco@@there.com>

mailing-list :marco@@localhost, ,,, ,, ,
   ,, "Marco Maggi" <marco@@there.com> ;
@result{} phrase         = mailing-list
@result{} first mailbox  = marco@@localhost
@result{} second mailbox = "Marco Maggi" <marco@@there.com>
@end example

@item Address
An address is a list of mailboxes and groups separated by @samp{,}.
@end table

@c page
@node email addresses types
@subsection Record types


All the record types defined by @library{email addresses} are meant to
be handled with the facilities of the @library{nos} library.  @ref{nos,
Nausicaa Object System}

@menu
* email addresses domain::              Domain.
* email addresses local-part::          Local part.
* email addresses addr-spec::           Address specification.
* email addresses route::               Route.
* email addresses mailbox::             Mailbox.
* email addresses group::               Group of mailboxes.
@end menu

@c page
@node email addresses domain
@subsubsection Domain


@deftp {Record Type} <domain>
Represent the domain portion of an address specification.  Fields
description:

@table @code
@item literal?
A boolean, true if the domain is composed of four numeric components.

@item subdomains
The list of strings representing the domain components.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun <domain>-literal? @var{dom}
@defunx <domain>-subdomains @var{dom}
Field accessors.
@end defun


@defun <domain>? @var{obj}
@defunx <domain>?/or-false @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{domain}.  The
@samp{/or-false} variant also returns @true{} if @var{obj} is @false{}.
@end defun


@defun assert-<domain>? @var{obj}
@defunx assert-<domain>?/or-false @var{obj}
Raise an exception if @var{obj} is not a record of type @class{domain}
or the values in the fields are invalid.  The @samp{/or-false} variant
allows @var{obj} to be @false{}.
@end defun


@deffn {NOS Method} object->string (@var{o} <domain>)
Return the string representation of @var{o}: The subdomain strings are
joined with a dot; if @var{o} represents a literal domain, the string is
enclosed in square parentheses.
@end deffn

@c page
@node email addresses local-part
@subsubsection Local part


@deftp {Record Type} <local-part>
Holds a list of local part strings.  The local part is a single string,
but for parsing reasons it is accumulated as a list of strings.  Fields
description:

@table @samp
@item subparts
A list of strings.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun <local-part>-subparts @var{lp}
Field accessor.
@end defun


@deffn {NOS Method} object->string (@var{o} <local-part>)
Return the string representation of @var{o}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node email addresses addr-spec
@subsubsection Address specification


@deftp {Record Type} <addr-spec>
Holds an address specification: a local part and a domain.  Fields
description:

@table @code
@item local-part
Holds a @class{local-part} record.

@item domain
Holds a @class{domain} record.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun <addr-spec>-local-part @var{as}
@defunx <addr-spec>-domain @var{as}
Field accessors.
@end defun


@deffn {NOS Method} object->string (@var{o} <addr-spec>)
Return the string representation of @var{o}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node email addresses route
@subsubsection Route


@deftp {Record Type} <route>
Holds a list of domains to be used to route the message to the final
destination.  Fields description:

@table @samp
@item domains
A list of @class{domain} records.
@end table
@end deftp


@deffn {NOS Method} object->string (@var{o} <route>)
Return the string representation of @var{o}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node email addresses mailbox
@subsubsection Mailbox


@deftp {Record Type} <mailbox>
Hold a mailbox specification.  Fields description:

@table @code
@item display-name
Holds the phrase string.

@item route
Holds @false{} or a @class{route} record.

@item addr-spec
Holds an @class{addr-spec} record.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun <mailbox>-display-name @var{mb}
@defunx <mailbox>-route @var{mb}
@defunx <mailbox>-addr-spec @var{mb}
Field accessors.
@end defun


@deffn {NOS Method} object->string (@var{o} <mailbox>)
Return the string representation of @var{o}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node email addresses group
@subsubsection Group of mailboxes


@deftp {Record Type} <group>
Holds a list of mailboxes and a phrase.  Fields description:

@table @samp
@item display-name
Holds the phrase string.

@item mailboxes
Holds a list of @class{mailbox} records.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun <group>-display-name @var{gr}
@defunx <group>-mailboxes @var{gr}
Field accessors.
@end defun


@deffn {NOS Method} object->string (@var{o} <group>)
Return the string representation of @var{o}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node email addresses lexer
@subsection Splitting an address into tokens


The lexer for the @library{email addresses} library is built upon the
@library{silex} lexer.  @ref{silex, A lexical analyser generator}


@defun make-address-lexer @var{IS}
Return an email address lexer closure drawing tokens from the input
system @var{IS}.  The input system must have been created using the
@library{silex} library.
@end defun


@deffn Parameter address-lexer-allows-comments
If set to true when @func{make-address-lexer} is invoked, the lexer
closure returns also comment tokens; else comment tokens are silently
discarded.
@end deffn


@defun address->tokens @var{IS}
Wrapper for @func{make-address-lexer} which reads all the tokens and
returns them as a list.
@end defun


The lexer closure is a thunk returning @class{lexical-token} records
with the following categories:

@table @samp
@item DOT
@itemx COMMA
@itemx COLON
@itemx SEMICOLON
@itemx AT
Represent the named character; the semantic value is the character
itself.

@item ANGLE-OPEN
@itemx ANGLE-CLOSE
Represent the @samp{#\<} and @samp{#\>} characters; the semantic value
is the character itself.

@item ATOM
The component of local parts and domains; the semantic value is the
string.  See @acronym{RFC} 2822 section ``3.2.4 Atom''.

@item DOMAIN-LITERAL-OPEN
The opening of a domain literal; the semantic value is a string
containing the single character @samp{[}.

@item DOMAIN-LITERAL-CLOSE
The closing of a domain literal; the semantic value is a string
containing the single character @samp{]}.

@item DOMAIN-LITERAL-INTEGER
A component of domain literal; the semantic value is an integer number
between @math{0} included and @math{256} excluded.

@item QUOTED-TEXT
A quoted text element; the semantic value is the string.
@end table

@c page
@node email addresses parser
@subsection Parsing tokens


The parser for the @library{email addresses} library is built upon the
@library{lalr} parser generator and makes use of the @library{lalr
lr-driver} driver.  @ref{lalr, A LALR(1) parser generator}


@defun make-address-parser
Return a new parser closure, to be used as explained in @ref{lalr
parser, Running the parser}.  If the parsing completes successfully, the
return value of the closure is a list of @class{mailbox} and or
@class{group} records.  @ref{email addresses types, Record types}
@end defun


Given the helper functions:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (email addresses)
  (silex)
  (nos))

(define (error-handler message token)
  (error #f message token))

(define (doit string)
  (let* ((IS      (lexer-make-IS :string string
                                 :counters 'all))
         (lexer   (make-address-lexer IS))
         (parser  (make-address-parser)))
    (parser lexer error-handler)))
@end example

@noindent
here is an example of parsing a list of mailboxes:

@example
(define result
  (doit "marco.maggi@@here.it, <marco.maggi@@there.it>"))

(length result)
@result{} 2

(<mailbox>? (car result))
@result{} #t

(<mailbox>? (cadr result))
@result{} #t

(object->string (car result))
@result{} "<marco.maggi@@here.it>"

(object->string (cadr result))
@result{} "<marco.maggi@@there.it>"
@end example

@noindent
and here an example of parsing a group:

@example
(define result
  (doit "the group: marco.maggi@@here.it, <marco.maggi@@there.it>, \r
Marco Maggi <mrc.mgg@@here.it>;"))

(length result)
@result{} 1

(<group>? (car result))
@result{} #t

(let* ((group       (car result))
       (mailboxes   (<group>-mailboxes group)))

  (length mailboxes)
  @result{} 3

  (<group>-display-name group)
  @result{} "the group"

  (object->string (car mailboxes))
  @result{} "<marco.maggi@@here.it>"

  (object->string (cadr mailboxes))
  @result{} "<marco.maggi@@there.it>"

  (object->string (<mailbox>-addr-spec (caddr mailboxes))))
  @result{} "mrc.mgg@@here.it"
@end example

@c page
@node infix
@chapter Infix notation utilities


The @library{infix} and @library{infix syntax} libraries provide
utilities to convert infix notation expressions to prefix notation
expressions.  The libraries are built upon @library{silex lexer} and
@library{lalr lr-driver}.

@menu
* infix strings::               Converting strings.
* infix sexp::                  Converting S--expressions.
@end menu

@c page
@node infix strings
@section Converting strings


@defun infix-string->sexp @var{expr-string}
Return the prefix S--expression corresponding to @var{expr-string}.  The
S--expression can be used directly for some symbolic interpretation or
evaluated with @func{eval}.  @ref{stdlib eval, Evaluation}

Examples:

@example
(infix-string->sexpr "1*2-3")   @result{} (- (* 1 2) 3)
(infix-string->sexpr "1\\3")    @result{} (div 1 3)
(infix-string->sexpr "1%3")     @result{} (mod 1 3)
(infix-string->sexpr "1^3")     @result{} (expt 1 3)

(infix-string->sexpr "cos(sin(1.1)+4)")
@result{} (cos (+ (sin 1.1) 4))

(infix-string->sexpr "fun(1, 2, 3, 4)")
@result{} (fun 1 2 3 4)

(infix-string->sexpr "cos(a) * (tan(b) / c)")
@result{} (* (cos a) (/ (tan b) c))
@end example
@end defun

Some interpretation rules:

@itemize
@item
Blank characters are ignored.

@item
Symbols in @var{expr-string} must match the following @library{silex}
regular expression:

@example
initial         [a-zA-Z_]
subsequent      @{initial@}|[0-9\.@@!$&:<=>?~\-]
symbol          @{initial@}@{subsequent@}*
@end example

@noindent
@ref{silex syntax, Syntax of the specification}.

@item
The following binary, infix operators are supported, in order of
increasing precedence from left to right:

@example
+ - * / // % ^ < > <= >= =
@end example

@noindent
remember that the Scheme comparison operators are meant to return a
boolean value, rather than a number object.  @samp{//} stands for
@func{div}, @samp{%} stands for @func{mod}, @samp{^} stands for
@func{expt}.

@item
Every symbol which is not an operator is interpreted as variable
reference or function call.  If the first non--blank character following
the symbol is an open parenthesis, it is interpreted as function call.
@end itemize

@c page
@node infix sexp
@section Converting S--expressions


The function @func{infix->prefix} is exported by @library{infix}, but
the macro @func{infix->prefix*} is exported by @library{infix syntax}.
When there is no conflict, it is friendly to import these bindings with:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (rename (infix)        (infix->prefix  infix))
  (rename (infix syntax) (infix->prefix* infix*)))
@end example

@noindent
or shorter:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (rename (infix)        (infix->prefix  ifx))
  (rename (infix syntax) (infix->prefix* ifx*)))
@end example

@noindent
consider that often only @library{infix syntax} is needed.


@defun infix->prefix @var{sexp-atom} ...
Convert the infix S--expression composed of the sequence of
@var{sexp-atom} arguments into a prefix S--expression.  The
S--expression can be used directly for some symbolic interpretation or
evaluated with @func{eval}.  @ref{stdlib eval, Evaluation}

The simplest way to use the function is to apply it to a single
S--expression:

@example
(infix->prefix '(1 + 2 + 3))    @result{} '(+ (+ 1 2) 3)
(infix->prefix '(1 + 2 - 3))    @result{} '(- (+ 1 2) 3)
(infix->prefix '(1 + (2 + 3)))  @result{} '(+ 1 (+ 2 3))
(infix->prefix '(1 + (2 - 3)))  @result{} '(+ 1 (- 2 3))

(infix->prefix '(cos (sin (1.1))))
@result{} '(cos (sin 1.1))

(infix->prefix '(cos (sin (1.1) + 4)))
@result{} '(cos (+ (sin 1.1) 4))

(infix->prefix '(fun (1.1 2)))
@result{} '(fun 1.1 2)

(infix->prefix '(fun (1 2 3 4)))
@result{} '(fun 1 2 3 4)
@end example

@noindent
while applying it to multiple arguments looks like:

@example
(infix->prefix 1 '+ 2 '+ 3)     @result{} '(+ (+ 1 2) 3)
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Syntax infix->prefix* @var{sexp-atom} ...
Like @func{infix->prefix} but evaluates the result on the spot, in the
lexical context of the macro use.  The syntax allows us to evaluate
forms like:

@example
(/ (* (cos a) (tan b)) c)
@result{} -0.39352735884466783

(let ((a 1) (b 2) (c 3))
  (infix->prefix* cos (a) * tan (b) / c))
@result{} -0.39352735884466783
@end example

This macro is exported by @library{infix syntax}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax infix->prefix*/context @var{context-identifier} @var{sexp-atom} ...
This is the core of @func{infix->prefix*}; it does the same things, but
allows the expansion of the expression to take place in the lexical
context of the identifier @var{context-identifier}, rather than in the
lexical context of the use of @func{infix->prefix*}.

This syntax is useful to define syntaxes making use of the infix
transformation; @func{infix->prefix*} itself is implemented as:

@example
(define-syntax infix->prefix*
  (lambda (stx)
    (syntax-case stx ()
       ((k . ?infix)
       (syntax (infix->prefix*/context k ?infix))))))
@end example
@end deffn


Some interpretation rules:

@itemize
@item
The following binary, infix operators are supported, in order of
increasing precedence from left to right:

@example
+ - * / // % ^ < > <= >= =
@end example

@noindent
remember that the Scheme comparison operators are meant to return a
boolean value, rather than a number object.  @samp{//} stands for
@func{div}, @samp{%} stands for @func{mod}, @samp{^} stands for
@func{expt}.

@item
The elements of the S--expression can be numbers, symbols, procedures,
all ``the other'' values.

@item
Symbols which are not operators are interpreted as variable references
or function calls.  If a symbol is followed by a list, it is a function
call.

@item
Function calls with one or more arguments require the arguments to be
grouped in a list.  There is no special separator in the list of
arguments.

@item
Procedures are treated like non--operator symbols.

@item
Numbers and all ``the other'' values are just put there.
@end itemize

@c page
@node foreign
@chapter Foreign functions interface


Nausicaa implements a foreign functions interface towards C language
libraries built upon the interfaces provided by the underlying Scheme
implementations.  There is a compound library @library{foreign}, which
exports everything.  Other libraries export only a subset of the
interface.

@menu
* memory::                      Low level memory handling.
* ffi::                         Foreign functions interface.
* cstring::                     C language strings handling.
* errno::                       C language system errors.
@end menu

@c page
@node memory
@section Low level memory handling


This section describes a low level @api{} for memory allocation and
access.  Memory allocated with these functions is subjected to garbage
collection.  To import the main library:

@example
(import (scheme)
  (foreign memory))
@end example

@noindent
other libraries are described in the relevant sections.  The
@library{uriel foreign} library also exports bindings from
@library{uriel memory}.

@menu
* memory conditions::           Out of memory errors.
* memory pointers::             Pointer objects.
* memory alloc::                Allocation functions.
* memory bytevectors::          Bytevectors conversion.
* memory blocks::               Memory blocks.
* memory buffers::              Memory buffers.
* memory cache::                Caching memory blocks.
* memory factory::              Caching object factories.
* memory compensate::           Compensations.
* memory buffer alloc::         Allocation in a buffer.
* memory refcount::             Reference counting.
* memory operations::           Operations.
* memory peekers::              Peeking values.
* memory pokers::               Pokers values.
* memory array peekers::        Peeking values into arrays.
* memory array pokers::         Poking values into arrays.

Independent libraries

* guarded malloc::              Guarded memory allocation.
@end menu

@c page
@node memory conditions
@subsection Out of memory errors


@deftp Condition {&out-of-memory}
Type of condition objects that represent a memory allocation error.
@end deftp


@deffn {Condition Constructor} make-out-of-memory-condition @var{number-of-bytes}
@deffnx {Condition Predicate} out-of-memory-condition? @var{object}
@deffnx {Field Getter} out-of-memory-number-of-bytes @var{object}
Functions to handle out of memory condition objects.

@var{number-of-bytes} is the size of the requested allocation that could
not be satisfied.
@end deffn


Example:

@example
(define (malloc size)
  (or (primitive-malloc size)
      (raise (condition (make-who-condition 'malloc)
                        (make-message-condition "out of memory")
                        (make-out-of-memory-condition size)))))
@end example


@defun raise-out-of-memory @var{who} @var{number-of-bytes}
Raise a non--continuable exception representing a memory allocation
failure.  The following form:

@example
(raise-out-of-memory 'malloc 4096)
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to:

@example
(raise (condition (make-who-condition 'malloc)
                  (make-message-condition "out of memory")
                  (make-out-of-memory-condition 4096)))
@end example
@end defun


@c page
@node memory pointers
@subsection Pointer objects


Pointer values are values that the Scheme implementation uses to
represent memory blocks.  Pointer could be represented with unsigned
exact integers, but having a specific pointer value allows validation of
arguments.


@deffn Procedure pointer? @var{x}
Return @true{} if the value of @var{x} is a value that the Scheme
implementation uses to represent memory blocks, return @false{}
otherwise.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-null? @var{pointer}
Return @true{} if @var{pointer} represents a null pointer according to
the underlying Scheme implementation, @false{} otherwise.
@end defun


@defvar pointer-null
Holds a null pointer: if @func{pointer->integer} is applied to it the
result is 0.  This variable exists to hold a prebuilt null pointer to be
used as return value of function argument, whenever it can make
algorithms simpler.
@end defvar


@deffn Procedure pointer->integer @var{pointer}
Convert a pointer value to an exact integer.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure integer->pointer @var{exact-integer}
Convert an exact integer to a pointer value.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-diff @var{pointer-1} @var{pointer-2}
Return the difference between the pointers.  It is implemented as:

@example
(define (pointer-diff pointer-1 pointer-2)
  (- (pointer->integer pointer-1)
     (pointer->integer pointer-2)))
@end example
@end defun


@defun pointer-add @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Add an offset to a pointer and return the resulting pointer.  It is
implemented as:

@example
(define (pointer-add pointer offset)
  (integer->pointer (+ (pointer->integer pointer)
		       offset)))
@end example
@end defun


@defun pointer=? @var{pointer0} @var{pointer} ...
@defunx pointer<? @var{pointer0} @var{pointer} ...
@defunx pointer>? @var{pointer0} @var{pointer} ...
@defunx pointer<=? @var{pointer0} @var{pointer} ...
@defunx pointer>=? @var{pointer0} @var{pointer} ...
@defunx pointer<>? @var{pointer0} @var{pointer} ...
All the arguments must be pointer values and are internally converted to
integers.  Return @true{} if the integers satisfy the selected predicate
(@code{=}, @code{<}, @code{>}, @code{<=}, @code{>=}), otherwise return
@false{}.  @func{pointer<>?} returns @true{} if all the pointers are
different.

With the single exception of @func{pointer<>?}: all the functions return
@true{} when applied to a single argument.
@end defun


@c page
@node memory alloc
@subsection Allocation functions


@ref{memory pointers} for the meaning of ``pointer values'' and the
functions we can use to handle them.


@subsubheading Platform functions


@defun platform-malloc @var{number-of-bytes}
An interface to the system @cfunc{malloc} function.  Allocate a block of
memory and return a pointer to it.  If an allocation error occurs:
return a null pointer.
@end defun


@defun platform-realloc @var{pointer} @var{new-number-of-bytes}
An interface to the system @cfunc{realloc} function.  Reallocate a block
of memory with different size and return a pointer to it.  If an
allocation error occurs: return a null pointer.
@end defun


@defun platform-calloc @var{count} @var{element-size}
An interface to the system @cfunc{calloc} function.  Allocate a block of
memory and return a pointer to it.  The block is big enough to hold
@var{count} objects each @var{element-size} wide.  Bytes in the block
are reset to zero.  If an allocation error occurs: return a null
pointer.
@end defun


@defun platform-free @var{pointer}
An interface to the system @cfunc{free} function.  Release the block of
memory referenced by @var{pointer}.  The return value is unspecified.
@end defun


@subsubheading Primitive functions


The following functions perform allocation through customisable
functions, which allow allocation logging and validation of error
reactions.


@deffn Function primitive-malloc @var{number-of-bytes}
@deffnx Parameter primitive-malloc-function
@func{primitive-malloc} allocates a block of memory and return a pointer
to it, or @false{} if an error occurs.  The allocation is performed
using the current value of @func{primitive-malloc-function}, which must
be a function.  The parameter is preset to @func{platform-malloc}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function primitive-realloc @var{pointer} @var{new-number-of-bytes}
@deffnx Parameter primitive-realloc-function
@func{primitive-realloc} reallocates a block of memory with a new size
and return a pointer to the new block, or @false{} if an error occurs.
The allocation is performed using the current value of
@func{primitive-realloc-function}, which must be a function.  The
parameter is preset to @func{platform-realloc}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function primitive-calloc @var{count} @var{element-size}
@deffnx Parameter primitive-calloc-function
@func{primitive-calloc} allocates a block of memory (big enough to hold
@var{count} elements of @var{element-size} each) and return a pointer to
it, or @false{} if an error occurs.  The allocation is performed using
the current value of @func{primitive-calloc-function}, which must be a
function.  The parameter is preset to @func{platform-calloc}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function primitive-free @var{pointer}
@deffnx Parameter primitive-free-function
@func{primitive-free} releases a block of memory.  The release is
performed using the current value of @func{primitive-free-function},
which must be a function.  The parameter is preset to
@func{platform-free}.
@end deffn


@subsubheading Exception raising functions


@defun malloc @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx realloc @var{pointer} @var{new-number-of-bytes}
@defunx calloc @var{count} @var{element-size}
Wrappers for the corresponding @code{primitive-} functions that raise an
@code{&out-of-memory} condition in case of error.  Blocks of memory
allocated with these functions can be freed with @func{primitive-free}.
@end defun


@subsubheading Examples


Care must be taken when managing memory with these low level functions:
memory blocks will @strong{not} be garbage collected.  A method to
release memory needed in a form is to use @func{dynamic-wind}:

@example
(let ((p #f))
  (dynamic-wind
    (lambda () (set! p (malloc 123)))
    (lambda () (do-something-with p))
    (lambda () (primitive-free p))))
@end example

@noindent
another is to use a compensation:

@example
(with-compensations
  (letrec ((p (compensate
                  (malloc 123)
                (with
                  (primitive-free p)))))
    (do-something-with p)))
@end example

@noindent
another method, if supported, is to use @func{malloc/guarded},
@ref{guarded malloc,guarded-malloc}

To test memory allocation failure we can do:

@example
(define (failing-alloc . args)
  pointer-null)

(parameterize ((primitive-malloc-function failing-alloc))
  (let ((p (malloc 4096)))
    ---))
@end example

To log memory allocations we can do:

@example
(let-values (((port get-string) (open-string-output-port)))
  (define (logging-malloc number-of-bytes)
    (let ((p (platform-malloc number-of-bytes)))
      (display (format "malloc:\t~s ~s\n" p number-of-bytes) port)
      p))

  (define (logging-free pointer)
    (display (format "free:\t~s\n" pointer) port)
    (platform-free pointer))

  (parameterize ((primitive-malloc-function logging-malloc)
                 (primitive-free-function logging-free))
    (let ((p (malloc 4096)))
      ---
      (primitive-free p))))
@end example


@c page
@node memory bytevectors
@subsection Bytevectors conversion


In the implementation of the following functions:

@itemize
@item
when copying from a bytevector to a memory block, bytes are peeked with
@func{bytevector-u8-ref} and poked with @func{pointer-set-c-char!};

@item
when copying from a memory block to a bytevector bytes are peeked with
@func{pointer-ref-c-unsigned-char} and poked with
@func{bytevector-u8-set!}.
@end itemize

Remember that we can compare two bytevectors with @func{bytevector=?},
but to compare raw blocks of memory we can use the @func{memcpy}
interface function.


@defun bytevector->pointer @var{bvector} @var{malloc}
@defunx bytevector->pointer @var{bvector} @var{malloc} @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx bytevector->pointer @var{bvector} @var{malloc} @var{number-of-bytes} @var{offset}
Allocate a memory block using @var{malloc} and copy into it the bytes in
@var{bvector}.  Return the pointer.

If @var{number-of-bytes} is given: that number of bytes is taken as size
of the memory block, and only that number of bytes are copied.

If both @var{number-of-bytes} and @var{offset} are given: that number of
bytes is taken as size of the memory block, and only that number of
bytes are copied starting at @var{offset} from the beginning of the
bytevector.

@var{malloc} must accept as single argument the number of bytes to
allocate, and must return a pointer to the allocated memory block.  If
an error occurs allocating memory: @var{malloc} must raise an exception
and not return to the caller.
@end defun


@defun bytevector->memblock @var{bvector} @var{malloc}
@defunx bytevector->memblock @var{bvector} @var{malloc} @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx bytevector->memblock @var{bvector} @var{malloc} @var{number-of-bytes} @var{offset}
Allocate a memory block using @var{malloc} and copy into it the bytes in
@var{bvector}.  Return a @code{memblock} record.

If @var{number-of-bytes} is given: that number of bytes is taken as size
of the memory block, and only that number of bytes are copied.

If both @var{number-of-bytes} and @var{offset} are given: that number of
bytes is taken as size of the memory block, and only that number of
bytes are copied starting at @var{offset} from the beginning of the
bytevector.

@var{malloc} must accept as single argument the number of bytes to
allocate, and must return a pointer to the allocated memory block.  If
an error occurs allocating memory: @var{malloc} must raise an exception
and not return to the caller.
@end defun


@defun pointer->bytevector @var{pointer} @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx pointer->bytevector @var{pointer} @var{number-of-bytes} @var{offset}
Build a bytevector of length @var{number-of-bytes} and copy into it the
bytes from the block of memory referenced by @var{pointer}.  If
@var{offset} is given: start to read bytes at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun memblock->bytevector @var{memblock}
@defunx memblock->bytevector @var{memblock} @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx memblock->bytevector @var{memblock} @var{number-of-bytes} @var{offset}
Duplicate a @code{memblock} record into a bytevector.

If @var{number-of-bytes} is given: that number of bytes is taken as size
of the bytevector, and only that number of bytes are copied.

If both @var{number-of-bytes} and @var{offset} are given: that number of
bytes is taken as size of the bytevector, and only that number of bytes
are copied starting at @var{offset} from the beginning of the block.
@end defun


@c page
@node memory blocks
@subsection Memory blocks


A memblock is a record that holds a pointer to an allocated memory block
and its allocated size.


@deftp {Record Type} memblock
Type of record used to represent memory blocks.  It has two fields: a
pointer value referencing an allocated memory block and the number of
bytes in the allocated memory block.
@end deftp


@defun make-memblock @var{pointer} @var{number-of-bytes}
Build and return a new @code{memblock} record.
@end defun


@defun memblock? @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type @code{memblock}, return
@false{} otherwise.
@end defun


@defun memblock-pointer @var{mb}
Return the value of the pointer field in @var{mb}.
@end defun


@defun memblock-size @var{mb}
Return the value of the size field in @var{mb}.
@end defun


@c page
@node memory buffers
@subsection Memory buffers


A buffer is a record derived from a memblock that adds a field
representing the number of used bytes.


@subsubheading Making


@deftp {Record Type} buffer
Type of record used to represent input and output buffers.  It has three
fields: a pointer value referencing an allocated memory block; the
number of bytes in the allocated memory block; the number of bytes
actually holding data.
@end deftp


@defun make-buffer @var{pointer} @var{number-of-bytes} @var{used-size}
Build and return a new @code{buffer} record.
@end defun


@subsubheading Predicates


@defun buffer? @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type @code{buffer}, return
@false{} otherwise.
@end defun


@defun buffer-full? @var{buf}
Return @true{} if all the bytes in @var{buf} are used, otherwise return
@false{}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-empty? buf
Return @true{} if all the bytes in @var{buf} are free, otherwise return
@false{}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-used? buf
Return @true{} if some of the bytes in @var{buf} are used, otherwise
return @false{}.
@end defun


@subsubheading Inspection


@defun buffer-pointer @var{buf}
Return the value of the pointer field in @var{buf}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-size @var{buf}
Return the value of the size field in @var{buf}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-used-size-set! @var{buf} @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx buffer-used-size @var{buf}
Set or get the value of the used--size field in @var{buf}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-free-size @var{buf}
Return the number of free bytes in @var{buf}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-pointer-to-free-bytes @var{buf}
Return a pointer to the first free byte in @var{buf}.  If the buffer if
full: the pointer references the first byte past the allocated block.
@end defun


@defun buffer-used-memblock @var{buf}
Return a @code{memblock} record representing the used portion of
@var{buf}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-free-memblock @var{buf}
Return a @code{memblock} record representing the free portion of
@var{buf}.
@end defun


@subsubheading Operations


@defun buffer-incr-used-size! @var{buf} @var{size-step}
Update the number of used bytes in @var{buf} by adding @var{size-step},
which must be an exact integer (positive or negative).
@end defun


@defun buffer-consume-bytes! @var{buf} @var{number-of-bytes}
Update the status of @var{buf} considering consumed the first
@var{number-of-bytes} bytes.  This means that used bytes starting at
1+@var{number-of-bytes} are shifted to the beginning of the allocated
area, and the number of used bytes is decremented by
@var{number-of-bytes}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-push-memblock! @var{buffer} @var{memblock}
Copy the contents of @var{memblock} into the free area at the end of
@var{buffer} and update the buffer's used area status.  It is an error
if @var{buffer} has not enough free bytes to hold data from
@var{memblock}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-pop-memblock! @var{memblock} @var{buffer}
Copy from the beginning of @var{buffer} to the beginning of
@var{memblock} enough bytes to fill @var{memblock} and update the used
area status of @var{buffer}.  It is an error if @var{buffer} has not
enough used bytes to fill @var{memblock}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-push-bytevector! @var{buffer} @var{bytevector}
Copy all the bytes from the @var{bytevector} to the free area of
@var{buffer}.  It is an error if @var{buffer} has not enough room to
hold all the bytes from @var{bytevector}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-pop-bytevector! @var{bytevector} @var{buffer}
Copy enough used bytes from @var{buffer} to @var{bytevector} to fill
@var{bytevector} and update the status of @var{buffer}.  It is an error
if @var{buffer} has not enough used bytes to fill @var{bytevector}.
@end defun


@defun buffer-push-buffer! @var{dst-buffer} @var{src-buffer}
@defunx buffer-pop-buffer! @var{dst-buffer} @var{src-buffer}
Copy as much bytes as possible from @var{src-buffer} to @var{dst-buffer}
and update the statuses of the buffers.
@end defun


@c page
@node memory cache
@subsection Caching memory blocks


@defun make-block-cache @var{number-of-bytes} @var{max-depth}
Build and return a new memory blocks cache, for blocks of
@var{number-of-bytes}, that at maximum will cache @var{max-depth}
blocks.  The return value is an interface function with the following
protocol:

@table @emph
@item when the function is invoked with zero arguments
it retrieves a block from the set of cached blocks; if the set is empty:
a new block is allocated with @func{calloc};

@item when the function is invoked with 1 argument
if the argument is the symbol @code{purge}: @func{primitive-free} is
applied to all the blocks in the cache and the cache is reset to empty;

else the argument must be a pointer previously returned by this
interface function: if the number of blocks in the cache is less than
@var{max-depth}, the pointer is stored in the cache, else
@func{primitive-free} is applied to it.
@end table
@end defun


@defun small-blocks-cache
@defunx small-blocks-cache @var{pointer}
@defunx small-blocks-cache purge
Interface function for a cache of memory blocks of size 32, 10 blocks
deep.  This cache is meant to be used for temporary storage space of
output values from foreign functions.  The size of 32 should be enough
to hold all the output values of C language standard types.

Blocks are allocated with @func{calloc} and reset to zero with
@func{memset} when released, so they are guaranteed to be set to zero
when acquired.

For example, the @gnu{} Libgcrypt library has a constructor with this
prototype:

@example
gcry_error_t gcry_cipher_open (gcry_cipher_hd_t * hd,
                               int algo, int mode,
                               unsigned int flag);
@end example

@noindent
where @code{gcry_cipher_hd_t} is a @code{typedef} for an opaque pointer
(we can think of it as @code{void *}); the @var{hd} argument must
reference a pointer sized location in which the function will store a
pointer to a newly allocated data structure; this location is required
only for the construction of a new object, so a Scheme interface could
do (unsafe code, not handling errors):

@example
(let ((hd  #f)
      (hd* (small-blocks-cache)))
  (gcry_cipher_open hd* algo mode flag)
  (set! hd (pointer-ref-c-pointer hd* 0))
  (small-blocks-cache hd*)
  hd)
@end example
@end defun


@defun page-blocks-cache
@defunx page-blocks-cache @var{pointer}
@defunx page-blocks-cache purge
Interface function for a cache of memory blocks of size 4096, 10 blocks
deep.
@end defun


@defun memblocks-cache @var{memblock-or-size}
Interface function to memblocks allocation and release.  When
@var{memblock-or-size} is:

@table @emph
@item a record of type @code{memblock}
the function releases the allocated memory block;

@item an unsigned exact integer
the number is meant to represent the number of bytes to be allocated: a
new @code{memblock} record is allocated and returned.
@end table

Allocation and releasing of memory blocks is done, in this order:

@enumerate
@item
relying on @func{small-blocks-cache} if the number of bytes is less than
or equal to the size of a small block;

@item
relying on @func{page-blocks-cache} if the number of bytes is less than
or equal to the size of a page block;

@item
relying on @func{calloc} and @func{primitive-free} in all the other cases.
@end enumerate
@end defun


@defun buffers-cache @var{buffer-or-size}
Like @func{memblocks-cache} but works with records of type @code{buffer}.
@end defun


@c page
@node memory factory
@subsection Caching object factories


@defun make-caching-object-factory @var{init-func} @var{final-func} @var{number-of-bytes} @var{max-depth}
Build and return a new caching object factory.  It is a wrapper for
@func{make-block-cache}, to which the @var{number-of-bytes} and
@var{max-depth} arguments are handed untouched.  The return value is an
interface function with the following protocol:

@table @emph
@item when the function is invoked with zero arguments
it retrieves a block from the cache and applies @var{init-func} to it; a
pointer to the block is returned;

@item when the function is invoked with 1 argument
if the argument is the symbol @code{purge}: the same symbol is handed to
the block cache, causing the cache to be purged of allocated blocks;

else the argument must be a pointer previously returned by this
interface function: @func{final-func} is applied to it, then it is
handed to the underlying block cache interface function.
@end table

For example, the @acronym{MPFR} library (Multiple Precision
Floating--Point Reliable Library) requires us to allocate structures of
type @code{mpfr_t}, then to use an initialiser and a finaliser with the
following prototypes:

@example
void mpfr_init  (mpfr_ptr p);
void mpfr_clear (mpfr_ptr p);
@end example

@noindent
@code{mpfr_t} values are real numbers with special representation, so we
may need a lot of them to carry on computations; a Scheme interface
could initialise itself like this:

@example
(define sizeof-mpfr 64) ;this must be exactly determined

(define mpfr-lib
  (let ((o (open-shared-object "libmpfr.so")))
    (shared-object o)
    o))

(define mpfr_ptr 'pointer)
(define-c-function mpfr_init  (void mpfr_init  (mpfr_ptr)))
(define-c-function mpfr_clear (void mpfr_clear (mpfr_ptr)))

(define mpfr
  (make-caching-object-factory mpfr_init mpfr_clear
                               sizeof-mpfr 100))

(define (compensate-mpfr)
  (letrec ((p (compensate (mpfr)
                (with (mpfr p)))))
    p))
@end example

@noindent
and then:

@example
(with-compensations
  (let ((a (compensate-mpfr))
        (b (compensate-mpfr)))
    (do-something-with a b)))
@end example

@noindent
at the end of the world, if we feel like it, we can do:

@example
(mpfr 'purge)
@end example
@end defun


@c page
@node memory compensate
@subsection Compensations


@ref{compensations} for details about compensations.


@defun malloc/compensated @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx calloc/compensated @var{count} @var{element-size}
@defunx malloc/c @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx calloc/c @var{count} @var{element-size}
Wrappers for @func{malloc} and @func{calloc} that allocate a block of
memory and return a pointer to it.  The appropriate invocation to
@func{primitive-free}, to free the block, is added to the dynamic
environment of the current compensations stack.
@end defun


@defun malloc-small/compensated
@defunx malloc-small/c
Acquire a small block of memory from @func{small-blocks-cache} and
return a pointer to it.  The appropriate invocation to
@func{small-blocks-cache}, to release the block, is added to the dynamic
environment of the current compensations stack.
@end defun


@defun malloc-page/compensated
@defunx malloc-page/c
Acquire a page of memory from @func{page-blocks-cache} and return a
pointer to it.  The appropriate invocation to @func{page-blocks-cache},
to release the block, is added to the dynamic environment of the current
compensations stack.
@end defun


@defun malloc-block/compensated @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx malloc-block/c @var{number-of-bytes}
Allocate a new memory block and return a pointer to it.  The appropriate
invocation to the release function is added to the dynamic environment
of the current compensations stack.

Allocation and releasing of memory blocks is done, in this order:

@enumerate
@item
relying on @func{small-blocks-cache} if the number of bytes is less than
or equal to the size of a small block;

@item
relying on @func{page-blocks-cache} if the number of bytes is less than
or equal to the size of a page block;

@item
relying on @func{calloc} and @func{primitive-free} in all the other cases.
@end enumerate
@end defun


@defun malloc-memblock/compensated @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx malloc-memblock/c @var{number-of-bytes}
Acquire a block of memory from @func{memblocks-cache} and return a
record of type @code{memblock}.  The appropriate invocation to
@func{memblocks-cache}, to release the block, is added to the dynamic
environment of the current compensations stack.
@end defun


@defun malloc-buffer/compensated @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx malloc-buffer/c @var{number-of-bytes}
Acquire a block of memory from @func{buffers-cache} and return a record
of type @code{buffer}.  The appropriate invocation to
@func{buffers-cache}, to release the block, is added to the dynamic
environment of the current compensations stack.
@end defun


@c page
@node memory buffer alloc
@subsection Allocation in a buffer


The @api{} described in this section allows us to allocate memory blocks
contiguously from a preallocated memory block accessed through a
@code{buffer} record.  Requested memory blocks are just marked as used
in the status of a buffer.  When using this allocator there is no need
to release individual blocks: releasing the buffer frees all of them.


@deffn Parameter memory-buffer-pool
Holds the buffer from which memory blocks must be allocated, or @false{}
if buffer allocation is disabled.  The default value is @false{}.
@end deffn


@defun primitive-buffer-malloc @var{number-of-bytes}
Allocates @var{number-of-bytes} in the current buffer pool and return a
pointer to the first allocated byte, or @false{} if there is not enough
room in the pool.

Notice that this function has the correct interface to be used as value
for the @func{primitive-malloc-function} parameter.
@end defun


@defun buffer-malloc @var{number-of-bytes}
A wrapper for @func{primitive-buffer-malloc} the raises an exception if
there is not enough room in the pool.
@end defun


Example:

@example
(with-compensations
  (parameterize ((memory-buffer-pool
                  (make-buffer (malloc/c 4096) 4096 0)))
    (let ((p (buffer-malloc 10))
          (q (buffer-malloc 20)))
      ---)))
@end example


@c page
@node memory refcount
@subsection Reference counting


Reference counting is implemented by allocating a block of memory with
the requested size plus @code{strideof-long}.  The block will look like
this:

@example
 strideof-long            data area
|-------------|--------------------------------------|
              ^
              |
pointer returned by MALLOC/REFCOUNT
@end example

@noindent
the reference counter is handled as an @code{unsigned long} and it is
located at a negative offset from the address we use to access data.


@defun malloc/refcount @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx malloc/refcount @var{number-of-bytes} @var{malloc-func}
@defunx malloc/rc @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx malloc/rc @var{number-of-bytes} @var{malloc-func}
Allocate a block of memory wide enough to hold @var{number-of-bytes}
using reference counting.  Return a pointer to the first byte in the
data area of the allocated block.

The reference counter is initially set to zero.

Memory is allocated with the supplied @var{malloc-func}, or with
@func{malloc} if @var{malloc-func} is not given.
@end defun


@defun pointer-acquire @var{pointer}
Increment the reference counter of the memory block referenced by
@var{pointer}.  The block must have been allocated with
@func{malloc/rc}.
@end defun


@defun pointer-release @var{pointer}
@defunx pointer-release @var{pointer} @var{free-func}
Decrement the reference counter of the memory block referenced by
@var{pointer}.  The block must have been allocated with
@func{malloc/rc}.

If the counter reaches zero: the block is freed using the supplied
@var{free-func}, or @var{primitive-free} if @var{free-func} is not
given.
@end defun


@c page
@node memory operations
@subsection Operations


@defun memcpy @var{dest-pointer} @var{source-pointer} @var{number-of-bytes}
An interface to the @cfunc{memcpy} system function.  Copy
@var{number-of-bytes} bytes from @var{source-pointer} to
@var{dest-pointer}.
@end defun


@defun memmove @var{dest-pointer} @var{source-pointer} @var{number-of-bytes}
An interface to the @cfunc{memmove} system function.  Like @func{memcpy}
but allows the blocks to be overlapped.
@end defun


@defun memset @var{pointer} @var{int} @var{number-of-bytes}
An interface to the @cfunc{memset} system function.  Set to @var{int},
an exact non--negative integer in the range @math{[0, 256)}, the first
@var{number-of-bytes} bytes starting from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun memcmp @var{pointer1} @var{pointer2} @var{number-of-bytes}
An interface to the @cfunc{memcmp} system function.  Compare
@var{number-of-bytes} starting at @var{pointer1} and @var{pointer2} and
return an integer having the same sign as the difference between the
first different bytes from the blocks.  If the blocks are equal, the
return value is zero.
@end defun


@c page
@node memory peekers
@subsection Peeking values


The @api{} described in this section is almost equal to the one provided
by Ikarus Scheme.  With all the functions the following notices about
arguments have to be considered.

@table @var
@item pointer
It must be a value used to reference a memory block.  @ref{memory
pointers} for details.

@item value
It must be an exact integer compatible with the target data type.

@item offset
It must be an exact integer, a fixnum, representing the offset of a byte
into an allocated block of memory.  It can be a negative offset.
@end table

When adding an offset to a pointer: all the following functions
@strong{do not} scale the offset to the size of the peeked value.
Pointer arithmetics is performed with byte offsets.


@subsubheading Peeking exact integers


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-signed-char @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-signed-char @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Peek the single byte located at @var{offset} from @var{pointer} and
return an exact integer representing the sign--extended integer value of
that byte. The returned value is in the inclusive range @code{[-128,
127]}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-unsigned-char @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-unsigned-char @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Peek the single byte located at @var{offset} from @var{pointer} and
return an exact integer representing the unsigned integer value of that
byte.  The returned value is in the inclusive range @code{[0, 255]}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-signed-short @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-signed-short @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Peek two bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer} and return an exact
integer representing the sign--extended integer value of the sequence.
The returned value is in the inclusive range @code{[-32768, 32767]}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-unsigned-short @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-unsigned-short @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Peek two bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer} and return an exact
integer representing the unsigned integer value of the sequence.  The
resulting value is in the inclusive range @code{[0, 65535]}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-signed-int @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-signed-int @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Peek four bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer} and return an exact
integer in the inclusive range @code{[-2^31, 2^31-1]}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-unsigned-int @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-unsigned-int @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Peek four bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer} and return an exact
integer in the inclusive range @code{[0, 2^32-1]}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-signed-long @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-signed-long @var{pointer} @var{offset}
On 64-bit systems: peek eight bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}
and return an integer in the inclusive range @code{[-2^63, 2^63-1]}.

On 32-bit systems, perform the same task as
@func{pointer-ref-c-signed-int}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-unsigned-long @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-unsigned-long @var{pointer} @var{offset}
On 64-bit systems: peek eight bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}
and return an integer in the inclusive range @code{[0, 2^64-1]}.

On 32-bit systems: perform the same task as
@func{pointer-ref-c-unsigned-int}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-signed-long-long @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-signed-long-long @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Peek eight bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer} and return an exact
integer in the inclusive range @code{[-2^63, 2^63-1]}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-unsigned-long-long @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-unsigned-long-long @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Peek eight bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer} and return an exact
integer in the inclusive range @code{[0, 2^63-1]}.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Peeking floating point numbers


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-float @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-float @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Return the four--byte float (represented as @ieee{} 754 single precision
floating point number) stored at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.  The
value is extended to an @ieee{} 754 double precision floating point
number that Ikarus uses to represent inexact numbers.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-double @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-double @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Return the eight--byte float (represented as @ieee{} 754 double
precision floating point number) stored at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Peeking pointers


@deffn Procedure pointer-ref-c-pointer @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@deffnx Procedure peek-pointer @var{pointer} @var{offset}
Return the a value representing the pointer stored at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.  The size of the pointer (also the number of bytes loaded)
depends on the architecture: it is 4 bytes on 32-bit systems and 8 bytes
on 64-bit systems.

We have to assume that the returned value can be converted to an exact
integer with @func{pointer->integer}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node memory pokers
@subsection Pokers values


The @api{} described in this section is almost equal to the one provided
by Ikarus Scheme.  With all the functions the following notices about
arguments have to be considered.

@table @var
@item pointer
It must be a value used to reference a memory block.  @ref{memory
pointers} for details.

@item value
It must be an exact integer compatible with the target data type.

@item offset
It must be an exact integer, a fixnum, representing the offset of a byte
into an allocated block of memory.  It can be a negative offset.
@end table

When adding an offset to a pointer: all the following functions
@strong{do not} scale the offset to the size of the poked value.
Pointer arithmetics is performed with byte offsets.


@macro poker{BYTENUM,BITNUM}
Set to @var{value} the \BYTENUM\ of memory located at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.  Only the \BITNUM\ lowermost bits of @var{value} are used
in the operation and the remaining bits are ignored.
@end macro


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Poking exact integers


@deffn Procedure pointer-set-c-char! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
@deffnx Procedure poke-char! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
@poker{single byte,8}
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-set-c-short! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
@deffnx Procedure poke-short! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
@poker{two bytes,16}
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-set-c-int! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
@deffnx Procedure poke-int! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
@poker{four bytes,32}
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-set-c-long! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
@deffnx Procedure poke-long! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
On 64-bit systems: @poker{eight bytes,64}

On 32-bit systems: perform the same task as @func{pointer-set-c-int!}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-set-c-long-long! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
@deffnx Procedure poke-long-long! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
@poker{eight bytes,64}
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Poking floating point numbers


@deffn Procedure pointer-set-c-float! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{flonum}
@deffnx Procedure poke-float! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{flonum}
Convert the Scheme floating point number @var{flonum} (represented in
Ikarus as an @ieee{} 754 double precision floating point number) to a
float (an @ieee{} 754 single precision floating point number) and store
the result in the four bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure pointer-set-c-double! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{flonum}
@deffnx Procedure poke-double! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{flonum}
Store the double precision @ieee{} 754 floating point value of the
Scheme @var{flonum} in the eight bytes at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Poking pointers


@deffn Procedure pointer-set-c-pointer! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{pointer-value}
@deffnx Procedure poke-pointer! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{pointer-value}
On 64-bit systems: set the eight bytes at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer} to the 64-bit pointer @var{pointer-value}.

On 32-bit systems: set the four bytes at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}
to the 32-bit pointer @var{pointer-value}.

We have to assume that we can convert an exact integer to a pointer
value using @func{integer->pointer}.
@end deffn


@c page
@node memory array peekers
@subsection Peeking values into arrays


The following functions make use of the pokers to access an array of
basic C language data types.  The index is used to compute the position
of the first byte taking into account the element stride of the data
type.

To allocate an array of a given type, we can compute the correct size
using the @code{sizeof-*-array} bindings.  @ref{ffi sizeof,
sizeof-char-array}


@defun peek-array-signed-char @var{pointer} @var{index}
@defunx peek-array-unsigned-char @var{pointer} @var{index}
Peek a character integer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun peek-array-signed-short @var{pointer} @var{index}
@defunx peek-array-unsigned-short @var{pointer} @var{index}
Peek a short integer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun peek-array-signed-int @var{pointer} @var{index}
@defunx peek-array-unsigned-int @var{pointer} @var{index}
Peek an integer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun peek-array-signed-long @var{pointer} @var{index}
@defunx peek-array-unsigned-long @var{pointer} @var{index}
Peek a long integer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun peek-array-signed-long-long @var{pointer} @var{index}
@defunx peek-array-unsigned-long-long @var{pointer} @var{index}
Peek a long long integer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun peek-array-float @var{pointer} @var{index}
@defunx peek-array-double @var{pointer} @var{index}
Peek a floating pointer number at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun peek-array-pointer @var{pointer} @var{index}
Peek a pointer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@c page
@node memory array pokers
@subsection Poking values into arrays


The following functions make use of the pokers to access an array of
basic C language data types.  The index is used to compute the position
of the first byte taking into account the element stride of the data
type.

To allocate an array of a given type, we can compute the correct size
using the @code{sizeof-*-array} bindings.  @ref{ffi sizeof,
sizeof-char-array}


@defun poke-array-char! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Poke a character at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun poke-array-short! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Poke a short integer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun poke-array-int! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Poke an integer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun poke-array-long! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Poke a long integer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun poke-array-long-long! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Poke a long long integer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun poke-array-float! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
@defunx poke-array-double! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Poke a floating point number at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun poke-array-pointer! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Poke a pointer at @var{index} from @var{pointer}.
@end defun


@c page
@node guarded malloc
@subsection Guarded memory allocation


The functions described in this section are usable only when the Scheme
implementation provides guardians (Ikarus does, Ypsilon does not).

To load the library:

@example
(import (scheme)
  (uriel guarded-malloc))
@end example


@defun malloc/guarded @var{number-of-bytes}
A wrapper for @func{primitive-malloc} that:

@itemize
@item
if the allocation is successful: registers the pointer into a guardian
and returns it;

@item
if the allocation fails, raises an @code{&out-of-memory} condition.
@end itemize

The library registers a cleanup function for the guardian in the state
of the @library{uriel cleanup} library, so memory allocated with this
function is released by invoking @func{uriel-cleanup}.  @strong{Do not}
free this memory with @func{primitive-free} or any other free function.
@end defun


@defun calloc/guarded @var{count} @var{element-size}
Like @func{malloc/guarded} but makes use of @func{calloc}.
@end defun


@c page
@node ffi
@section Foreign functions interface


This chapter describes a wrapper of the foreign functions interface from
the underlying Scheme implementation.  To load the library:

@example
(import (scheme)
  (uriel ffi))
@end example

@noindent
only functions needed to build an interface to a foreign C language
shared object are made available by this library; other functions (to do
actual operations) are in the @library{glibc ---} and @library{posix
---} libraries.

The @library{uriel foreign} library also exports bindings from
@library{uriel ffi}.

@menu
* ffi example::                 Basic interface to Zlib.
* ffi load::                    Dynamic loading of libraries.
* ffi call::                    Interface functions.
* ffi sizeof::                  Sizes and limits.
* ffi headers::                 Inspecting foreign header files.
@end menu


@c page
@node ffi example
@subsection Basic interface to Zlib


Here is an incomplete example interface to the popular Zlib on Unix like
systems, to make clear what we are talking about.  It is incomplete
because it does not define the offsets of fields in the @code{z_stream}
structure, which are needed to use it.  @ref{ffi headers} for a
discussion about how to implement the missing bits.

As we can see: writing a binding to a foreign library is basically a
copy and paste from the C language header file, with some adjustment
(most of which can be done in a text editor with appropriate regular
expressions support).

@example
(library (zlib)
  (export
    deflateInit deflate deflateEnd
    inflateInit inflate inflateEnd

    Z_NO_FLUSH Z_PARTIAL_FLUSH Z_SYNC_FLUSH Z_FULL_FLUSH
    Z_FINISH Z_BLOCK

    Z_OK Z_STREAM_END Z_NEED_DICT Z_ERRNO Z_STREAM_ERROR
    Z_DATA_ERROR Z_MEM_ERROR Z_BUF_ERROR Z_VERSION_ERROR

    Z_NO_COMPRESSION Z_BEST_SPEED
    Z_BEST_COMPRESSION Z_DEFAULT_COMPRESSION

    Z_FILTERED Z_HUFFMAN_ONLY Z_RLE Z_FIXED Z_DEFAULT_STRATEGY

    Z_NULL)
  (import (scheme)
    (uriel ffi))

  (define zlib
    (let ((o (open-shared-object 'libz.so)))    ;load it
      (shared-object o)                         ;make it current
      o))

;;; Type conversions.
  (define z_streamp 'pointer)

;;; Constants.
  (define Z_NO_FLUSH            0)
  (define Z_PARTIAL_FLUSH       1)
  (define Z_SYNC_FLUSH          2)
  (define Z_FULL_FLUSH          3)
  (define Z_FINISH              4)
  (define Z_BLOCK               5)

  (define Z_OK                  0)
  (define Z_STREAM_END          1)
  (define Z_NEED_DICT           2)
  (define Z_ERRNO               -1)
  (define Z_STREAM_ERROR        -2)
  (define Z_DATA_ERROR          -3)
  (define Z_MEM_ERROR           -4)
  (define Z_BUF_ERROR           -5)
  (define Z_VERSION_ERROR       -6)

  (define Z_NO_COMPRESSION      0)
  (define Z_BEST_SPEED          1)
  (define Z_BEST_COMPRESSION    9)
  (define Z_DEFAULT_COMPRESSION -1)

  (define Z_FILTERED            1)
  (define Z_HUFFMAN_ONLY        2)
  (define Z_RLE                 3)
  (define Z_FIXED               4)
  (define Z_DEFAULT_STRATEGY    0)

  (define Z_NULL                0)

;;; Deflating.
  (define-c-function deflateInit
    (int deflateInit_ (z_streamp int)))

  (define-c-function deflate
    (int deflate (z_streamp int)))

  (define-c-function deflateEnd
    (int deflateEnd (z_streamp)))

;;; Inflating.
  (define-c-function inflateInit
    (int inflateInit_ (z_streamp)))

  (define-c-function inflate
    (int inflate (z_streamp int)))

  (define-c-function inflateEnd
    (int inflateEnd (z_streamp))))
@end example


@c page
@node ffi load
@subsection Dynamic loading of libraries


@deffn Parameter shared-object
Holds a value referencing the ``current'' shared object: the shared
object in which @func{primitive-make-c-function} will look for symbols.
Shared objects references are produced with @func{open-shared-object}.

The initial value selects the current process; with this value we can
access symbols exported by the current program and the libraries that
have been already loaded (this may be platform specific, check out the
documentation of your operative system).  For example: the symbols from
the standard C library, like @cfunc{fwrite}, can be accessed this way.
@end deffn


@defun open-shared-object @var{library-name}
Open a new shared object and return its identifier.  The return value is
meant to be stored in the @code{shared-object} parameter while creating
interface functions for it.

@var{library-name} must be a string or symbol representing the file name
or pathname to be opened.  Examples:

@example
(define mpfr-lib
  (let ((l (open-shared-object 'libmpfr.so)))
    (shared-object l)
    l))

(define mpfi-lib
  (let ((l (open-shared-object '/usr/local/lib/libmpfi.so)))
    (shared-object l)
    l))
@end example

In the case of a name (wihtout directory part) the search path for
shared objects is implemenation dependent.

@quotation
@emph{Unix:} We can find documentation about the search path of shared
objects in the manual page of @cfunc{dlopen}.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defvar self-shared-object
Bound to the value that identifies the current process.  It is the
initial value of @code{shared-object}
@end defvar


@c page
@node ffi call
@subsection Functions interface


@menu
* ffi call types::              Interface to C language types.
* ffi call out::                Calling foreign functions.
* ffi call in::                 Calling Scheme functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node ffi call types
@subsubsection Interface to C language types


The following symbols are accepted as C language type identifiers, but
not all Scheme implementations support them all: we will have to find
out by trial and error.  We should be safe using: @code{int},
@code{pointer} and @code{double}, which are enough for a lot of foreign
libraries.

@quotation
@emph{Ikarus:} The Ikarus Scheme implementation supports all these
types.
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Ypsilon:} The Ypsilon Scheme implementation @strong{does not}
support all these types.
@end quotation

Remember that C strings (zero terminated arrays of @code{char}) must be
created from Scheme strings with @func{string->cstring}, and handed to
the foreign functions as pointers.

@table @code
@item char
@itemx schar
@itemx signed-char
Signed character.

@item uchar
@itemx unsigned-char
Unsigned character.

@item int
@itemx signed-int
@itemx ssize_t
Signed fixnum.

@item uint
@itemx unsigned
@itemx unsigned-int
@itemx size_t
Unsigned fixnum.

@item long
@itemx signed-long
Signed integer.

@item ulong
@itemx unsigned-long
Unsigned integer.

@item float
Single precision flonum.

@item double
Double precision flonum.

@item pointer
@itemx void*
@itemx char*
@itemx FILE*
Pointer to a block of memory.

@item callback
Pointer to a callback function.

@item void
No value.
@end table


@c page
@node ffi call out
@subsubsection Calling foreign functions


@defun primitive-c-function @var{ret-type} @var{export-name} @var{arg-types}
@defunx primitive-c-function/with-errno @var{ret-type} @var{export-name} @var{arg-types}
Build and return a new Scheme interface function for a C language
foreign function in the current shared object.  The current shared
object is referenced by the value of the @code{shared-object} parameter.

The @code{/with-errno} variant returns two values: the return value from
the foreign function and the value of the @code{errno} variable just
after the call to the foreign function.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} Some @posix{} function returns an integer representing
success or failure, and only when the returned value represents failure
the @code{errno} value is meaningful.
@end quotation

@table @var
@item ret-type
A symbol among the ones that select a C language type.  It is the type
of value returned by the foreign function.

@item pri-name
A Scheme symbol representing the name of the symbol exported by the
shared object.  Beware that, sometimes, the exported symbols are
different from the ones we write in C language code to call a function.

@item arg-types
A list of symbols among the ones that select a C language type.  It is
the list of types for the arguments required by the foreign function.
If the foreign function accepts no arguments: this list must be @code{(void)}.
@end table

@quotation
@emph{Unix:} One way to discover the names of symbols exported by a
shared object, is to apply the @command{strings} command to the shared
object.  For example, to discover the names of deflate functions in
Zlib:

@example
$ strings /usr/lib/libz.so | grep deflate
deflateInit_
deflate
deflateEnd
...
@end example
@end quotation

Variadic functions (like @cfunc{fprintf}) are @strong{not} supported
(sorry).

As an example, the main deflate functions from Zlib can be defined with:

@example
(define deflateInit
  (primitive-make-c-function
     'int 'deflateInit_ '(pointer int)))

(define deflate
  (primitive-make-c-function
     'int 'deflate '(pointer int)))

(define deflateEnd
  (primitive-make-c-function
     'int 'deflateEnd '(pointer)))
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Syntax make-c-function @var{ret-type} @var{pri-name} (@var{arg-type0} @var{arg-type} ...)
@deffnx Syntax make-c-function/with-errno @var{ret-type} @var{pri-name} (@var{arg-type0} @var{arg-type} ...)
@deffnx Syntax define-c-function @var{pub-name} (@var{ret-type} @var{pri-name} (@var{arg-type0} @var{arg-type} ...))
@deffnx Syntax define-c-function/with-errno @var{pub-name} (@var{ret-type} @var{pri-name} (@var{arg-type0} @var{arg-type} ...))
These are wrappers for @func{primitive-make-c-function} that allow us to
avoid quoting of arguments.  @func{define-c-function} is itself a
wrapper for @func{make-c-function}.

The @code{/with-errno} variants are wrappers for
@func{primitive-c-function/with-errno}.

As an example, the main deflate functions from Zlib can be defined with:

@example
(define zstream 'pointer)

(define deflateInit
  (make-c-function int deflateInit_ (zstream int)))

(define deflate
  (make-c-function int deflate (zstream int)))

(define deflateEnd
  (make-c-function int deflateEnd (zstream)))
@end example

@noindent
or with:

@example
(define zstream 'pointer)

(define-c-function deflateInit
  (int deflateInit_ (zstream int)))

(define-c-function deflate
  (int deflate (zstream int)))

(define-c-function deflateEnd
  (int deflateEnd (zstream)))
@end example

@noindent
and notice that: in the expansion of the macros, the predefined types
(like @code{int}) will be quoted, while the custom types (like
@code{zstream}) will be left unquoted and so they will correctly
reference bindings (in the example @code{zstream} evaluates to
@code{pointer}).
@end deffn


Miscellaneous examples from the C standard library and the @posix{}
interface:

@example
(define-c-function fopen
  (pointer fopen (pointer pointer)))

(define-c-function fwrite
  (size_t fwrite (pointer size_t size_t pointer)))

(define-c-function fread
  (size_t fread (pointer size_t size_t pointer)))

(define-c-function open
  (int open (pointer int)))

(define-c-function write
  (ssize_t write (int pointer size_t)))

(define-c-function read
  (ssize_t read (int pointer size_t)))
@end example



@c page
@node ffi call in
@subsubsection Calling Scheme functions




@c page
@node ffi sizeof
@subsection Sizes and limits


A set of bindings is provided to allow interface libraries to be aware
of C language type sizes and limits.  To load the library:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (foreign ffi sizeof))
@end example

The @library{foreign} library also exports bindings from
@library{foreign ffi sizeof}.


@defvr Constant pointer-integer
Set to a symbol representing one of the unsigned integer types for
callout arguments and return values.  It is meant to be the integer type
that is equal in size to a pointer, so it can be used in place of the
@code{pointer} type for Scheme implementation that do not have it (for
example: Larceny checkout 5877).
@end defvr


@defvr Constant sizeof-char
@defvrx Constant sizeof-short
@defvrx Constant sizeof-int
@defvrx Constant sizeof-long
@defvrx Constant sizeof-long-long
@defvrx Constant sizeof-float
@defvrx Constant sizeof-double
@defvrx Constant sizeof-long-double
@defvrx Constant sizeof-pointer
The number of bytes in the specified type.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant alignof-char
@defvrx Constant alignof-short
@defvrx Constant alignof-int
@defvrx Constant alignof-long
@defvrx Constant alignof-long-long
@defvrx Constant alignof-float
@defvrx Constant alignof-double
@defvrx Constant alignof-long-double
@defvrx Constant alignof-pointer
The number of bytes of the alignment for the specified type.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant strideof-char
@defvrx Constant strideof-short
@defvrx Constant strideof-int
@defvrx Constant strideof-long
@defvrx Constant strideof-long-long
@defvrx Constant strideof-float
@defvrx Constant strideof-double
@defvrx Constant strideof-long-double
@defvrx Constant strideof-pointer
The number of bytes of the array stride for the specified type.
@end defvr


@deffn Syntax sizeof-char-array @var{number-of-elements}
@deffnx Syntax sizeof-short-array @var{number-of-elements}
@deffnx Syntax sizeof-int-array @var{number-of-elements}
@deffnx Syntax sizeof-long-array @var{number-of-elements}
@deffnx Syntax sizeof-long-long-array @var{number-of-elements}
@deffnx Syntax sizeof-float-array @var{number-of-elements}
@deffnx Syntax sizeof-double-array @var{number-of-elements}
@deffnx Syntax sizeof-long-double-array @var{number-of-elements}
@deffnx Syntax sizeof-pointer-array @var{number-of-elements}
Compute the number of bytes to allocate to hold an array of the
specified type.
@end deffn


@defvr Constant valueof-char-max
@defvrx Constant valueof-char-min
@defvrx Constant valueof-schar-max
@defvrx Constant valueof-schar-min
@defvrx Constant valueof-uchar-max
@defvrx Constant valueof-shrt-max
@defvrx Constant valueof-shrt-min
@defvrx Constant valueof-ushrt-max
@defvrx Constant valueof-int-max
@defvrx Constant valueof-int-min
@defvrx Constant valueof-uint-max
@defvrx Constant valueof-long-max
@defvrx Constant valueof-long-min
@defvrx Constant valueof-wchar-max
@defvrx Constant valueof-ssize-max
The value of the specified constant.  For example: the value of
@code{valueof-int-max} is the C language constant @code{INT_MAX}.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant words-bigendian
Bound to @true{} if the platform is big endian, @false{} otherwise.
Notice that this information is also available with the @rnrs{6}
function @func{native-endianness}.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant on-32-bits-system
@defvrx Constant on-32-bits-systems
@defvrx Constant on-64-bits-system
@defvrx Constant on-64-bits-systems
Bound to @true{} if the platform has words of 32 or 64 bits
respectively.
@end defvr

@c page
@node ffi headers
@subsection Inspecting foreign header files



@c page
@node cstring
@section C language strings handling


A @emph{C string} is a block of memory holding a string of characters
terminated by a zero byte.  The functions described in this chapter are
exported by the @library{uriel cstring} library.  The @library{uriel
foreign} library also exports bindings from @library{uriel cstring}.


@menu
* cstring inspection::          Inspecting cstrings.
* cstring operations::          Acting upon cstrings.
* cstring conversion::          Converting to and from cstrings.
* cstring argv::                Converting arrays of cstrings.
@end menu


@c page
@node cstring inspection
@subsection Inspecting strings


@defun strlen @var{pointer}
Return the number of characters in the C string referenced by
@var{pointer}.
@end defun


@defun strcmp @var{pointer1} @var{pointer2}
@defunx strncmp @var{pointer1} @var{pointer2} @var{number-of-bytes}
An interface to the @cfunc{strcmp} system function.  Compare
@var{number-of-bytes} starting at @var{pointer1} and @var{pointer2} and
return an integer having the same sign as the difference between the
first different bytes from the blocks.  If the blocks are equal, the
return value is zero.
@end defun


@c page
@node cstring operations
@subsection Acting upon cstrings


@defun strdup @var{pointer}
@defunx strdup @var{pointer} @var{malloc}
Build a new C string copying the C string referenced by @var{pointer}
and return a pointer to it.  The new string is allocated using the
supplied @var{malloc} function, or @func{malloc} if no function is
given.
@end defun


@defun strndup @var{pointer} @var{size}
@defunx strndup @var{pointer} @var{size} @var{malloc}
Build a new C string copying the first @var{size} bytes from the C
string referenced by @var{pointer} and return a pointer to it.  The new
string is allocated using the supplied @var{malloc} function, or
@func{malloc} if no function is given.
@end defun


@c page
@node cstring conversion
@subsection Converting to and from cstrings


@defun string->cstring @var{string-or-symbol}
@defunx string->cstring @var{string-or-symbol} @var{malloc}
@defunx string->cstring/c @var{string-or-symbol}
Build a new C string representing the Scheme @var{string-or-symbol} and
return a pointer value referencing it.

@func{string->cstring} allocates memory using supplied @var{malloc}
function, or @func{malloc} otherwise.  The conversion is performed using
@func{string->utf8}.  To use a compensated allocation: we can use
@func{malloc/c} or @func{malloc-block/c} as @var{malloc} argument.

@func{string->cstring/c} allocates memory using @func{malloc-block/c}.
@end defun


@defun cstring->string @var{cstring}
@defunx cstring->string/len @var{cstring} @var{number-of-bytes}
Build a new Scheme string representing the @var{cstring}.  The
conversion is performed using a @code{s8} bytevector.

For @func{cstring->string/len} only @var{number-of-bytes} bytes are
taken from the C string.
@end defun


@c page
@node cstring argv
@subsection Converting arrays of cstrings


A null--terminated array of C strings looks like this:

@example
                  -
argv pointer ---> | pointer to string -----> C string 0
                  -
                  | pointer to string -----> C string 1
                  -
                  | pointer to string -----> C string 2
                  -
                  | pointer to string -----> C string 3
                  -
                  | null pointer
                  -
@end example


@defun strings->argv @var{args}
@defunx strings->argv @var{args} @var{malloc-func}
Convert the list of Scheme strings and symbols in @var{args} into a
null--terminated array of strings.  Return the pointer to the array.

The array and the strings are allocated with the function
@var{malloc-func}, or with @func{malloc} if @var{malloc-func} is not
given.
@end defun


@defun argv-length @var{argv}
Return the number of strings in the null--terminated array of strings
referenced by the @var{argv} pointer.
@end defun


@defun argv->strings @var{argv}
Convert the null--terminated array of strings referenced by the
@var{argv} pointer to a list of Scheme strings.
@end defun



@c page
@node errno
@section C language system errors


The bindings described in this chapter are exported by the
@library{uriel errno} library.  The @library{uriel foreign} library also
exports bindings from @library{uriel errno}.


@menu
* errno values::                Error codes.
* errno conversion::            Conversion of error codes.
* errno condition::             Raising exceptions.
@end menu


@c page
@node errno values
@subsection Error codes


@cindex @code{E2BIG}
@cindex @code{EACCES}
@cindex @code{EADDRINUSE}
@cindex @code{EADDRNOTAVAIL}
@cindex @code{EADV}
@cindex @code{EAFNOSUPPORT}
@cindex @code{EAGAIN}
@cindex @code{EALREADY}
@cindex @code{EBADE}
@cindex @code{EBADF}
@cindex @code{EBADFD}
@cindex @code{EBADMSG}
@cindex @code{EBADR}
@cindex @code{EBADRQC}
@cindex @code{EBADSLT}
@cindex @code{EBFONT}
@cindex @code{EBUSY}
@cindex @code{ECANCELED}
@cindex @code{ECHILD}
@cindex @code{ECHRNG}
@cindex @code{ECOMM}
@cindex @code{ECONNABORTED}
@cindex @code{ECONNREFUSED}
@cindex @code{ECONNRESET}
@cindex @code{EDEADLK}
@cindex @code{EDEADLOCK}
@cindex @code{EDESTADDRREQ}
@cindex @code{EDOM}
@cindex @code{EDOTDOT}
@cindex @code{EDQUOT}
@cindex @code{EEXIST}
@cindex @code{EFAULT}
@cindex @code{EFBIG}
@cindex @code{EHOSTDOWN}
@cindex @code{EHOSTUNREACH}
@cindex @code{EIDRM}
@cindex @code{EILSEQ}
@cindex @code{EINPROGRESS}
@cindex @code{EINTR}
@cindex @code{EINVAL}
@cindex @code{EIO}
@cindex @code{EISCONN}
@cindex @code{EISDIR}
@cindex @code{EISNAM}
@cindex @code{EKEYEXPIRED}
@cindex @code{EKEYREJECTED}
@cindex @code{EKEYREVOKED}
@cindex @code{EL2HLT}
@cindex @code{EL2NSYNC}
@cindex @code{EL3HLT}
@cindex @code{EL3RST}
@cindex @code{ELIBACC}
@cindex @code{ELIBBAD}
@cindex @code{ELIBEXEC}
@cindex @code{ELIBMAX}
@cindex @code{ELIBSCN}
@cindex @code{ELNRNG}
@cindex @code{ELOOP}
@cindex @code{EMEDIUMTYPE}
@cindex @code{EMFILE}
@cindex @code{EMLINK}
@cindex @code{EMSGSIZE}
@cindex @code{EMULTIHOP}
@cindex @code{ENAMETOOLONG}
@cindex @code{ENAVAIL}
@cindex @code{ENETDOWN}
@cindex @code{ENETRESET}
@cindex @code{ENETUNREACH}
@cindex @code{ENFILE}
@cindex @code{ENOANO}
@cindex @code{ENOBUFS}
@cindex @code{ENOCSI}
@cindex @code{ENODATA}
@cindex @code{ENODEV}
@cindex @code{ENOENT}
@cindex @code{ENOEXEC}
@cindex @code{ENOKEY}
@cindex @code{ENOLCK}
@cindex @code{ENOLINK}
@cindex @code{ENOMEDIUM}
@cindex @code{ENOMEM}
@cindex @code{ENOMSG}
@cindex @code{ENONET}
@cindex @code{ENOPKG}
@cindex @code{ENOPROTOOPT}
@cindex @code{ENOSPC}
@cindex @code{ENOSR}
@cindex @code{ENOSTR}
@cindex @code{ENOSYS}
@cindex @code{ENOTBLK}
@cindex @code{ENOTCONN}
@cindex @code{ENOTDIR}
@cindex @code{ENOTEMPTY}
@cindex @code{ENOTNAM}
@cindex @code{ENOTRECOVERABLE}
@cindex @code{ENOTSOCK}
@cindex @code{ENOTTY}
@cindex @code{ENOTUNIQ}
@cindex @code{ENXIO}
@cindex @code{EOPNOTSUPP}
@cindex @code{EOVERFLOW}
@cindex @code{EOWNERDEAD}
@cindex @code{EPERM}
@cindex @code{EPFNOSUPPORT}
@cindex @code{EPIPE}
@cindex @code{EPROTO}
@cindex @code{EPROTONOSUPPORT}
@cindex @code{EPROTOTYPE}
@cindex @code{ERANGE}
@cindex @code{EREMCHG}
@cindex @code{EREMOTE}
@cindex @code{EREMOTEIO}
@cindex @code{ERESTART}
@cindex @code{EROFS}
@cindex @code{ESHUTDOWN}
@cindex @code{ESOCKTNOSUPPORT}
@cindex @code{ESPIPE}
@cindex @code{ESRCH}
@cindex @code{ESRMNT}
@cindex @code{ESTALE}
@cindex @code{ESTRPIPE}
@cindex @code{ETIME}
@cindex @code{ETIMEDOUT}
@cindex @code{ETOOMANYREFS}
@cindex @code{ETXTBSY}
@cindex @code{EUCLEAN}
@cindex @code{EUNATCH}
@cindex @code{EUSERS}
@cindex @code{EWOULDBLOCK}
@cindex @code{EXDEV}
@cindex @code{EXFULL}

It may be that not all the constants are defined on our platform, if a
symbol is not defined the value of the corresponding variable is
@false{}.  @value{PACKAGE} attempts to define the following symbols (in
row--then--column alphabetical order):

@example
E2BIG               EACCES              EADDRINUSE
EADDRNOTAVAIL       EADV                EAFNOSUPPORT
EAGAIN              EALREADY            EBADE
EBADF               EBADFD              EBADMSG
EBADR               EBADRQC             EBADSLT
EBFONT              EBUSY               ECANCELED
ECHILD              ECHRNG              ECOMM
ECONNABORTED        ECONNREFUSED        ECONNRESET
EDEADLK             EDEADLOCK           EDESTADDRREQ
EDOM                EDOTDOT             EDQUOT
EEXIST              EFAULT              EFBIG
EHOSTDOWN           EHOSTUNREACH        EIDRM
EILSEQ              EINPROGRESS         EINTR
EINVAL              EIO                 EISCONN
EISDIR              EISNAM              EKEYEXPIRED
EKEYREJECTED        EKEYREVOKED         EL2HLT
EL2NSYNC            EL3HLT              EL3RST
ELIBACC             ELIBBAD             ELIBEXEC
ELIBMAX             ELIBSCN             ELNRNG
ELOOP               EMEDIUMTYPE         EMFILE
EMLINK              EMSGSIZE            EMULTIHOP
ENAMETOOLONG        ENAVAIL             ENETDOWN
ENETRESET           ENETUNREACH         ENFILE
ENOANO              ENOBUFS             ENOCSI
ENODATA             ENODEV              ENOENT
ENOEXEC             ENOKEY              ENOLCK
ENOLINK             ENOMEDIUM           ENOMEM
ENOMSG              ENONET              ENOPKG
ENOPROTOOPT         ENOSPC              ENOSR
ENOSTR              ENOSYS              ENOTBLK
ENOTCONN            ENOTDIR             ENOTEMPTY
ENOTNAM             ENOTRECOVERABLE     ENOTSOCK
ENOTTY              ENOTUNIQ            ENXIO
EOPNOTSUPP          EOVERFLOW           EOWNERDEAD
EPERM               EPFNOSUPPORT        EPIPE
EPROTO              EPROTONOSUPPORT     EPROTOTYPE
ERANGE              EREMCHG             EREMOTE
EREMOTEIO           ERESTART            EROFS
ESHUTDOWN           ESOCKTNOSUPPORT     ESPIPE
ESRCH               ESRMNT              ESTALE
ESTRPIPE            ETIME               ETIMEDOUT
ETOOMANYREFS        ETXTBSY             EUCLEAN
EUNATCH             EUSERS              EWOULDBLOCK
EXDEV               EXFULL
@end example


@c page
@node errno conversion
@subsection Conversion of error codes


@defun strerror @var{errno-numeric-value}
An interface to the system @cfunc{strerror} function.  Return the string
message coresponding to @var{errno-numeric-value}.
@end defun


@defun symbol->errno @var{symbol}
@defunx symbol->errno/or-error @var{symbol}
Attempt the conversion from an @code{errno} symbolic value to the
corresponding numeric value.  Return an integer or @false{} if the
symbol is not defined on the underlying platform.

The @code{or-error} variant raises an assertion violation if
@var{symbol} is not an @code{errno} symbolic value.
@end defun


@defun errno->symbol @var{number}
@defunx errno->symbol/or-error @var{number}
Attempt the conversion from an @code{errno} numeric value to the
corresponding symbolic value.  Return a symbol or @false{} if
@var{number} is not an @code{errno} numeric value.

The @code{or-error} variant raises an assertion violation if
@var{number} is not an @code{errno} numerc value.
@end defun


@c page
@node errno condition
@subsection Raising exceptions


@deftp Condition {&errno}
Type of condition objects that represent an error in a foreign function
signaled with the @code{errno} variable.
@end deftp


@deffn {Condition Constructor} make-errno-condition @var{errno-numeric-value} @var{errno-symbolic-value}
@deffnx {Condition Predicate} errno-condition? @var{object}
@deffnx {Field Getter} errno-numeric-value @var{object}
@deffnx {Field Getter} errno-symbolic-value @var{object}
Functions to handle foreign system error condition objects.

Fake example:

@example
(let ((errno ---))
  (raise (condition (make-who-condition 'read)
                    (make-message-condition (strerror errno))
                    (make-errno-condition
                      errno
                      (errno->symbol/or-error errno-numeric-value)))))
@end example
@end deffn


@defun make-errno-condition* @var{errno-numeric-value}
Wrapper for @func{make-errno-condition} that builds an @code{&errno}
condition from the numeric value only.
@end defun


@defun raise-errno-error @var{who} @var{errno-numeric-value}
@defunx raise-errno-error @var{who} @var{errno-numeric-value} @var{irritants}
Raise a non--continuable exception representing a foreign function
system error signaled through the @code{errno} variable.  If
@var{irritants} is not given, it defaults to @false{}.

The following form:

@example
(let ((errno ---)
      (pathname ---))
  (raise-errno-error 'write errno pathname))
@end example

@noindent
is equivalent to:

@example
(raise
  (condition (make-who-condition 'write)
             (make-message-condition (strerror errno))
             (make-errno-condition* errno)
             (make-irritants-condition pathname)))
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node kmp
@chapter Knuth-Morris-Pratt searching


The Knuth--Morris--Pratt (@acronym{KMP}) sequence--search algorithm is a
method of rapidly scanning a sequence of values for the occurrence of
some fixed pattern.  It has the advantage of never requiring
backtracking; hence, it is useful for searching sequences that do not
support backtracking or random--access, such as input ports.

For an explanation of the algorithm:

@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knuth-Morris-Pratt_algorithm}

The following routines package up the initialisation and searching
phases of the algorithm for general use in the library
@library{knuth-morris-pratt}.  They also support searching through
sequences that arrive in buffered chunks, in that intermediate search
state can be carried across applications of the search loop from the end
of one buffer application to the next.

A second critical property of @acronym{KMP} search is that it requires
the allocation of auxiliary memory proportional to the length of the
pattern, but constant in the size of the value type.  Alternate
searching algorithms frequently require the construction of a table with
an entry for every possible value, which can be prohibitively expensive,
for example, in a 16-bit or 32-bit character representation.

The algorithm is especially suited to search patterns of characters in
text, so many examples are given for strings.  However the library
supports searching any values in any sequence.

@menu
* kmp intro::                   Introduction.
* kmp conv::                    Conventions.
* kmp vector::                  The restart vector.
* kmp step::                    Single step of the search.
* kmp partial::                 Partial search.
* kmp full::                    Full sequence search.
@end menu

@c page
@node kmp intro
@section Introduction


When searching for a pattern string in a text string:

@example
(define pattern "ciao")
(define text    "Oh, ciao!")
@end example

@noindent
we start looking for the first char in the pattern:

@example
(define match-start
  (let loop ((i 0))
    (if (char=? (string-ref text i)
                (string-ref pattern 0))
        i
      (loop (+ 1 i)))))
@result{} 3
@end example

@noindent
now that we know a match for the first char, we go on looking for the
full pattern:

@example
(define match-past
  (let loop ((pi 1)                     ;; pattern index
             (ti (+ 1 match-start)))    ;; text index
    (cond
     ((= pi (string-length pattern)) pi)    ;; found
     ((= ti (string-length text))    #f)    ;; not found
     (else
      (if (char=? (string-ref ti text)
                  (string-ref pi pattern))
          (loop (+ 1 pi) (+ 1 ti))
        #f)))))                             ;; not found
@end example

@noindent
we have the following possible outcomes:

@itemize
@item
@code{match-past} is true: We have found a match in the substring
@code{[match-start, match-past)} of @code{text}.

@item
@code{match-past} is false: We have to restart matching @code{pattern}
from character @code{(+ 1 match-start)} of @code{text}.
@end itemize

The action ``restart matching'' involves backtracking (to go back) in
the @code{text} string; this can be avoided if we do the following
considerations.

@itemize
@item
Let's say we have to perform the search:

@example
(define pattern "ciao mamma")
(define text    "Oh, ciao papa e ciao mamma!")

;;               0123456789012345678901234567
;;               0         1         2
@end example

@noindent
we notice that the first char @code{c} is never repeated in the pattern;
so after we have matched the first occurrence of @code{"ciao "} in the
substring @math{[4, 9)} of @code{text}, we do not need to restart from
index @math{5}, we just try to match @code{pattern} from index @math{10}
of @code{text}.

@item
Let's say we have to perform the search:

@example
(define pattern "ciao ciao mamma")
(define text    "Oh, ciao ciao ciao mamma!")

;;               01234567890123456789012345
;;               0         1         2
@end example

@noindent
after we have matched the first occurrence of @code{"ciao ciao "} in the
substring @math{[4, 14)} of @code{text}, we find a @code{c} rather than
a @code{m}; we could restart matching @code{pattern} from index
@math{5}, but we notice that we already have matched substring @math{[0,
5)} of @code{pattern} in substring @math{[9, 14)} of @code{text}; so we
can avoid backtracking and go on matching index @math{5} of
@code{pattern} with index @math{14} of @code{text}.
@end itemize

Summary: We can implement an efficient algorithm if we precompute where
to restart from, after a partial match.  Of course, since the algorithm
needs no backtracking, we can also search for multiple patterns in
``parallel''.


@c page
@node kmp conv
@section Conventions


The following conventions for arguments documentation hold:

@table @var
@item @var{pattern}
It is the sequence of elements to search for.  It must support random
access by indexing.

@item @var{pattern-start}
@itemx @var{pattern-past}
The half--open range of elements in @var{pattern} to search for.
@var{pattern-start} is the index of the first (included) element;
@var{pattern-past} is the index of the last (excluded) element.

@item @var{text}
It is a fixed sequence in which to do the search.  It must support
random access by indexing.

@item @var{text-start}
@itemx @var{text-past}
The half--open range of elements in @var{text} in which to do the
search.  @var{text-start} is the index of the first (included) element;
@var{text-past} is the index of the last (excluded) element.

@item item=
It is an equality function used to construct the restart vector; for
characters it is typically @func{char=?} or @func{char-ci=?}, while for
numbers it is @func{=}.

@item item-ref
It is an element extraction function to be applied to @var{pattern} to
retrieve an element by index; if @var{pattern} is a string, it is
@func{string-ref}; if @var{pattern} is a vector it is @func{vector-ref};
if @var{pattern} is a list it is @func{list-ref}.

@item restart-vector
It is the @acronym{KMP} restart vector for @var{pattern}, as constructed
by @func{%kmp-make-restart-vector}.
@end table


@c page
@node kmp vector
@section The restart vector


@defun %kmp-make-restart-vector @var{item=} @var{item-ref} @var{pattern} @var{pattern-start} @var{pattern-past}
Build a @dfn{restart vector}, to be used to search sequences for the
occurrence of the selected subsequence of @var{pattern}.

The definition of the restart vector @math{V} for string @math{P} is: If
we have matched elements @math{0 ... i-1} of @math{P} against some
search sequence @math{T}:
@iftex
@tex
$$
P[i-1] = T[k]
P[i-2] = T[k-1]
...
P[0] = T[k-(i-1)]
$$
@end tex
@end iftex
@ifnottex

@example
P[i-1] = T[k]
P[i-2] = T[k-1]
...
P[0] = T[k-(i-1)]
@end example

@end ifnottex
and @math{P[i]} does not match @math{T[k]}, then reset @math{i := V[i]},
and try again to match @math{T[k]}.  If @math{V[i] = -1}: move on to
@math{T[k+1]} and @math{P[0]}.
@end defun

@c page
@node kmp step
@section Single step of the search


@defun %kmp-step @var{item=} @var{item-ref} @var{restart-vector} @var{next-value-from-text} @var{next-index-in-pattern} @var{pattern} @var{pattern-start}
This function encapsulates the work performed by one step of the
@acronym{KMP} search.  Return the new index in the pattern; that is, how
much of the pattern we have matched, including the given value from
text.
@end defun


Searching for the pattern @code{"hello"} in the text @code{"ciao hello
salut"} looks like this:

@example
(let* ((text          "ciao hello salut")
       ;;              01234567890123456
       ;;              0         1
       (text-past     (string-length text))

       (pattern       "ciao")
       (pattern-start 0)
       (pattern-past  (string-length pattern))

       (rv            (%kmp-make-restart-vector char=? string-ref
                         pattern pattern-start pattern-past)))
  (let loop ((ti 0)
             (pi pattern-start))
    (or (and (= pi pattern-past) ti) ; found
        (and (not (= ti text-past))  ; not found
             (loop (+ 1 ti)
                   (%kmp-step char=? string-ref rv
                              (string-ref text ti)
                              pi pattern pattern-start))))))
@result{} 10
@end example

@noindent
if the pattern was not found the return value is @false{}; if the
pattern was found the return value is the index in the text of the
character past the last matched one.

Abstracting the search from a string to a generic source of characters,
we can write the following function, whose return value is the same as
the loop above:

@example
(define (return-match-past end-of-text? get-next-char
                           pattern pattern-start pattern-past)
  (let ((rv (%kmp-make-restart-vector char=? string-ref
               pattern pattern-start pattern-past)))
    (let loop ((ti 0)
               (pi pattern-start))
      (or (and (= pi pattern-past) ti) ; found
          (and (not (end-of-text?))    ; not found
               (loop (+ 1 ti)
                     (%kmp-step char=? string-ref rv
                        (get-next-char)
                        pi pattern pattern-start)))))))
@end example

@noindent
a usage example with a string looks like this:

@example
(let* ((text           "ciao hello salut")
       ;;               01234567890123456
       ;;               0         1
       (pattern        "hello")
       (ti             0)
       (end-of-text?   (lambda ()
                         (= ti (string-length text))))
       (get-next-char  (lambda ()
                         (begin0
                             (string-ref text ti)
                           (set! ti (+ 1 ti))))))
  (return-match-past end-of-text? get-next-char
                     pattern 0 (string-length pattern)))
@result{} 10
@end example

@noindent
a usage example with an input port looks like this:

@example
(let* ((text           "ciao hello salut")
       ;;               01234567890123456
       ;;               0         1
       (pattern        "salut")
       (port           (open-string-input-port text))
       (end-of-text?   (lambda ()
                         (eof-object? (peek-char port))))
       (get-next-char  (lambda ()
                         (read-char port))))
  (return-match-past end-of-text? get-next-char
                     pattern 0 (string-length pattern)))
@result{} 16
@end example

@c page
@node kmp partial
@section Partial search


@defun %kmp-partial-search @var{item=} @var{item-ref} @var{restart-vector} @var{next-index-in-pattern} @var{text} @var{text-start} @var{text-end} @var{pattern} @var{pattern-start}
Using this function is equivalent to apply @func{%kmp-step} across the
selected subsequence of @var{text} in search of the selected subsequence
of @var{pattern}; the pattern is @code{(vector-length rv)} characters
long.

@itemize
@item
If the pattern is found: Return @math{-j} (a strictly negative integer)
where @math{j} is the index of the value past the one that last matched
the pattern in @var{text}.

@item
If the pattern is not found: Return the index in the restart vector (a
non negative integer) to be used in the next call to this function.
@end itemize

This utility is designed to allow searching for occurrences of a fixed
sequence that might extend across multiple buffers of data.  Notice
that, in this case, when the returned value is negative: It is the index
in the last buffer, not in the whole text.
@end defun


A simple one--shot search over a given string looks like the following:

@example
(let* ((text            "ciao hello salut")
       ;;                01234567890123456
       ;;                0         1
       (text-start      0)
       (text-past       (string-length text))

       (pattern         "hello")
       (pattern-start   0)
       (pattern-past    (string-length pattern))

       (restart-vector  (%kmp-make-restart-vector
                           char=? string-ref
                           pattern pattern-start pattern-past)))
  (let ((i (%kmp-partial-search
              char=? string-ref restart-vector pattern-start
              text text-start text-past
              pattern pattern-start)))
    (or (<= 0 i) ;; not found
        (- i)))) ;; found, return match past index
@result{} 10
@end example

@noindent
if the pattern was not found: Return @false{}.  If the pattern was
found: Return the index in the string of the character past the one that
matched the end of the pattern.

Generalising this to a generic source of strings (represented by a list
of strings):

@smallexample
(let* ((strings         '("ciao h " "he hel h"
                          "ell hel" "lo salut"))
       (end-of-data?    (lambda ()
                          (null? strings)))
       (get-next-chunk  (lambda ()
                          (begin0
                              (car strings)
                            (set! strings (cdr strings))))))

  (let* ((pattern         "hello")
         (pattern-start   0)
         (pattern-past    (string-length pattern))

         (restart-vector  (%kmp-make-restart-vector char=? string-ref
                             pattern pattern-start pattern-past)))

    (let loop ((pi 0))
      (and (not (end-of-data?))          ; not found
           (let* ((buf (get-next-chunk))
                  (pi  (%kmp-partial-search
                          char=? string-ref
                          restart-vector pi
                          buf 0 (string-length buf)
                          pattern pattern-start)))
             (if (< pi 0)
                 (cons buf (- pi)) ; found
               (loop pi)))))))
@result{} ("lo salut" . 2)
@end smallexample

@noindent
if the pattern was not found: Return @false{}.  If the pattern was
found: Return a cons whose car is the string chunk holding the end of
the text that matched, and whose cdr is the index in the chunk of the
character past the one that matched the end of the pattern.

@c page
@node kmp full
@section Full sequence search


@defun %kmp-search @var{item=} @var{item-ref} @var{text} @var{text-start} @var{text-past} @var{pattern} @var{pattern-start} @var{pattern-past}
Search the selected subsequence of @var{text} for the selected
subsequence of @var{pattern}.  Return the index of the @strong{first}
value in @var{text} that matched the @strong{first} value in the
pattern.

This function is like @func{%string-contains} and
@func{%string-contains-ci}, in facts those are implemented as:

@smallexample
(define (%string-contains text text-beg text-past
                          pattern pattern-beg pattern-past)
  (%kmp-search char=? string-ref
               text text-beg text-past
               pattern pattern-beg pattern-past))

(define (%string-contains-ci text text-beg text-past
                             pattern pattern-beg pattern-past)
  (%kmp-search char-ci=? string-ref
               text text-beg text-past
               pattern pattern-beg pattern-past))
@end smallexample
@end defun

@c page
@node one-dimension
@chapter One dimensional extended ranges


The one--dimension libraries implement low level operations over
generalised ranges of a coordinate.  They can be used to operate on
ranges of numbers or characters or whatever objects upon which we can
define an ordering.  There are two versions of the library:

@table @library
@item one-dimension-co
Represents domains of values using disjoint half--open ranges; each
range has a lower--included and an upper--excluded limit.

@item one-dimension-cc
Represents domains of values using disjoint double--closed ranges; each
range has a lower--included and an upper--included limit.
@end table

Both the libraries have the same interface, meaning that the functions
names and arguments are the same; the only difference in semantics is
that @library{one-dimension-co} interprets argument ranges as
half--open, while @library{one-dimension-cc} interprets argument ranges
as double--closed.  @library{one-dimension-cc} is the backbone of the
@library{char-sets} library.

@menu
* one-dimension intro::         Data types and conventions.
* one-dimension make::          Constructors.
* one-dimension pred::          Predicates.
* one-dimension inspect::       Inspection.
* one-dimension ops::           Operations.
@end menu

@c page
@node one-dimension intro
@section Data types and conventions


A @dfn{range} is a pair representing a half--open interval of items.
The car of the pair if the included lower--limit, called @var{start};
the cdr is the excluded upper--limit, called @var{past}, or the included
upper--limit, called @var{last}.  Empty ranges are @strong{not} valid.

A @dfn{domain} is a sorted list of ranges.  Empty domains are empty
lists.  Ranges in a domain do not overlap and are not contiguous.  A
domain of half--open ranges has the following format:

@example
((start1 . past1) (start2 . past2) (start3 . past3) ...)
@end example

@noindent
with the constraints:

@example
start1 < past1 < start2 < past2 < start3 < past3 < ...
@end example

@noindent
a domain of double--closed ranges has the following format:

@example
((start1 . last1) (start2 . last2) (start3 . last3) ...)
@end example

@noindent
with the constraints:

@example
start1 <= last1 < start2 <= last2 < start3 <= last3 < ...
@end example

The range and domain functions accept the following arguments:

@table @var
@item obj
Any object.

@item item
An object that satisfies the @var{item?} predicate of the selected type.

@item range
A valid range according to @func{%range?}.

@item domain
A valid domain according to @func{%domain?}.

@item start
The included left--limit of a range.

@item past
The excluded lower--limit of a range.

@item last
The included upper--limit of a range.

@item item?
A unary predicate returning @true{} if the argument is a valid item.
For integers it can be @func{integer?}, while for characters it can be
@func{char?}.

If we need to exclude some range of values, we can do it by properly
define this function.  For example, to exclude the integers in the
half--open range @math{[10, 23)} we can use:

@example
(lambda (n)
  (and (integer? n)
       (<= 10  n)
       (<   n 23)))
@end example

@item item=?
An n--ary predicate returning @true{} if the all the arguments are
equal.  @func{char=?} is an example of such a function.

@item item<?
An n--ary predicate returning @true{} if the all the arguments, in the
given order, are in strict increasing order.  @func{char<?} is an
example of such a function.

@item item<=?
An n--ary predicate returning @true{} if the all the arguments, in the
given order, are in non--strict increasing order.  @func{char<=?} is an
example of such a function.

@item item-min
An n--ary function returning the minimum between its arguments.  For
numbers it can be @func{min}, for characters we can use:

@example
(lambda (a b) (if (char<? a b) a b))
@end example

@item item-max
An n--ary function returning the maximum between its arguments.  For
numbers it can be @func{max}, for characters we can use:

@example
(lambda (a b) (if (char<? a b) b a))
@end example

@item item-prev
A binary function accepting an item and a range, or false, as arguments.
The second argument can be @false{}, meaning that no range is specified,
or a pair whose car is the left--limit and whose cdr is the
right--limit; when the range is true, it is guaranteed that the item is
inside the range.

This function must return the value previous to item inside the range;
if it is not possible to compute the previous value, because the lower
bound has been reached: The function must return @false{}.

For integers it can be:

@example
(lambda (x range)       ; with both (one-dimension-cc)
  (let ((x (- x 1)))    ; and (one-dimension-co)
    (if range
        (and (<= (car range) x)
             x)
      x)))
@end example

@noindent
for characters it can be:

@example
(lambda (ch range)      ; with (one-dimension-cc)
  (let* ((x  (- (char->integer ch) 1)))
    (and (number-in-range? x)
         (let ((ch (integer->char x)))
           (if range
               (and (<= x (char->integer (car range)))
                    ch)
             ch)))))

(define (number-in-range? x)
  (or (and (<= 0 x)
           (<  x #xD800))
      (and (<  #xDFFF x)
           (<= x #x10FFFF))))
@end example

@item item-next
A binary function accepting an item and a range, or false, as arguments.
The second argument can be @false{}, meaning that no range is specified,
or a pair whose car is the left--limit and whose cdr is the
right--limit; when the range is true, it is guaranteed that the item is
inside the range.

This function must return the value next to item inside the range; if it
is not possible to compute the next value, because the upper bound has
been reached: The function must return @false{}.

For integers it can be:

@example
(lambda (x range)       ; with (one-dimension-cc)
  (let ((x (+ 1 x)))
    (if range
        (and (<= x (cdr range))
             x)
      x)))

(lambda (x range)       ; with (one-dimension-co)
  (let ((x (+ 1 x)))
    (if range
        (and (< x (cdr range))
             x)
      x)))
@end example

@noindent
for characters it can be:

@example
(lambda (ch range)      ; with (one-dimension-cc)
  (let* ((x  (+ 1 (char->integer c))))
    (and (number-in-range? x)
         (let ((ch (integer->char x)))
           (if range
               (and (<= x (char->integer (cdr range)))
                    ch)
             ch)))))

(define (number-in-range? x)
  (or (and (<= 0 x)
           (<  x #xD800))
      (and (<  #xDFFF x)
           (<= x #x10FFFF))))
@end example

@item item-minus
A binary function:

@itemize
@item
For half--open ranges: It must return the number of items between the
first argument included and the second argument excluded.

@item
For double--closed ranges: It must return the number of items between
the first argument included and the second argument included.
@end itemize

The arithmetic @func{-} applied to integers is an example of such a
function for half--open ranges; for characters and double--closed ranges
we can use:

@example
(lambda (past start)
  (+ 1 (- (char->integer past)
          (char->integer start))))
@end example

@item item-copy
A unary function returning a copy of an item.  For ranges holding atomic
values (like characters or integers) it is fine to use @code{(lambda (x)
x)}.

@item type
A record used as type descriptor for collected items.  It is used as
first arguments to all almost all the functions.  Type descriptors are
built by @func{%make-type-descriptor}.
@end table

@c page
@node one-dimension make
@section Constructors


@defun %make-type-descriptor @var{item?} @var{item=?} @var{item<?} @var{item<=?} @var{item-min} @var{item-max} @var{item-prev} @var{item-next} @var{item-minus} @var{item-copy}
Build and return a new type descriptor.
@end defun


@defun %make-range @var{type} @var{start} @var{past}
@defunx %make-range @var{type} @var{start} @var{last}
Compose @var{start} and @var{past}/@var{last} into a range.  This
function validates the arguments to make sure the resulting range is
valid.
@end defun


@defun %range-copy @var{type} @var{range}
Return a clone of @var{range}.
@end defun


@defun %make-domain @var{type} @var{item/range} ...
Build and return a new domain.  The list of @var{item/range} may be the
empty list or a mixed list of items and ranges.  See
@func{%domain-add-item} and @func{%domain-add-range} for details.
@end defun


@defun %domain-copy @var{type} @var{domain}
Return a newly allocated domain holding a copy of @var{domain}.
@end defun


@defun %domain-add-item @var{type} @var{domain} @var{obj}
Add the single value @var{obj} to @var{domain}, return the new domain.
The returned domain may share some structure with @var{domain}.  If
@var{obj} does not satisfy the @var{item?} function of @var{type}: An
assertion violation is raised.

@var{obj} is interpreted as lower limit of a range and the
@var{item-next} function of @var{type} is used to generate the
corresponding upper limit.  If generating the next item fails: An
assertion violation is raised.
@end defun


@defun %domain-add-range @var{type} @var{domain} @var{range}
Add @var{range} to @var{domain}, return the new domain.  The returned
domain may share some structure with @var{domain}.

@var{range} is a pair of items; it is interpreted as double--closed
range by @library{one-dimension-cc} and as half--open range by
@library{one-dimensionc-co}.
@end defun

@c page
@node one-dimension pred
@section Predicates


@subsubheading Range predicates


@defun %range? @var{type} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a valid range.
@end defun


@defun %range-contains? @var{type} @var{range} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a member of @var{range}.
@end defun


@defun %range=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the ranges are equal.
@end defun


@defun %range<? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} has all members less than all members of
@var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range<=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} has all members less than, or equal to,
all members of @var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-start<? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the start of @var{range-a} is less than the start of
@var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-start<=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the start of @var{range-a} is less than, or equal to,
the start of @var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-past<? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
@defunx %range-last<? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the past/last of @var{range-a} is less than the past
of @var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-last<=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
@defunx %range-past<=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the past/last of @var{range-a} is less than, or equal
to, the past of @var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-contiguous? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} and @var{range-b} are contiguous.  It
does not matter which range has start less than the other.
@end defun


@defun %range-overlapping? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the ranges have some elements in common.
@end defun


@defun %range-superset? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
@defunx %range-superset?/strict @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} is a superset or a strict superset of
@var{range-a}.
@end defun


@defun %range-subset? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
@defunx %range-subset?/strict @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} is a subset or a strict subset of
@var{range-a}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Domain predicates


@defun %domain? @var{type} @var{domain}
Return true if @var{domain} is a valid domain.
@end defun


@defun %domain-empty? @var{domain}
Return true if the domain is empty.
@end defun


@defun %domain-contains? @var{type} @var{domain} @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is an element of @var{domain}.
@end defun


@defun %domain=? @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return true if the arguments represent the same domain.
@end defun


@defun %domain<? @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return true if all the elements of @var{domain-a} are strictly less than
all the elements of @var{domain-b}.  Empty domains cannot be ordered, so
if an argument is empty the return value is @false{}.
@end defun


@defun %domain-subset? @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
@defunx %domain-subset?/strict @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return @true{} if @var{domain-a} is a subset or strict subset of
@var{domain-b}.
@end defun


@defun %domain-superset? @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
@defunx %domain-superset?/strict @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return @true{} if @var{domain-a} is a superset or strict superset of
@var{domain-b}.
@end defun


@c page
@node one-dimension inspect
@section Inspection


@defun %range-length @var{type} @var{range}
Return the number of items in the range.
@end defun


@defun %domain-size @var{type} @var{domain}
Return the number of items in the domain.
@end defun

@c page
@node one-dimension ops
@section Operations


@subsubheading Set operations


@defun %range-intersection @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return a range representing the intersection of the argument ranges.  It
does not matter which range has start less than the other.

Intersection is a closed operation on the space of ranges: The
intersection of two ranges is a range (possibly empty).  If the ranges
are not overlapping return @false{} to represent the empty range.
@end defun


@defun %range-union @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return two values representing the union of the argument ranges.  It
does not matter which range has start less than the other.

Union is @strong{not} a closed operation on the space of ranges: The
union of two contiguous or overlapping ranges is a single range, but the
union of two disjoint ranges is the set holding the two argument ranges.

If the argument ranges are disjoint and non--contiguous: Return two
values being @var{range-a} and @var{range-b}.  If the argument ranges
are contiguous or overlapping: Return two values being @false{} and a
new range representing the union.

This function should be called like this:

@example
(let-values (((head tail) (%range-union type r-a r-b)))
  (when head ---)
  (when tail ---))
@end example
@end defun


@defun %range-difference @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return two values representing the difference between the argument
ranges; the difference is the set of elements present in one range and
not in the other.  It does not matter which range has start less than
the other.

Difference is @strong{not} a closed operation on the space of ranges: In
genreral the result is a couple of ranges.  The first one represents
values which are all less than the values in the second one.  Both the
returned values can be @false{}.

This function should be called like this:

@example
(let-values (((head tail) (%range-difference type r-a r-b)))
  (when head ---)
  (when tail ---))
@end example
@end defun


@defun %range-in-first-only @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return two values representing the elements of @var{range-a} that are
not in @var{range-b}.

This operation is @strong{not} a closed operation on the space of
ranges: In genreral the result is a couple of ranges.  The first one
represents values which are all less than the values in the second one.
Both the returned values can be @false{}.

This function should be called like this:

@example
(let-values (((head tail) (%range-in-first-only type r-a r-b)))
  (when head ---)
  (when tail ---))
@end example
@end defun


@defun %domain-intersection @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return a new domain representing the intersection of the arguments.  The
intersection is the set of values present in both the arguments.

The returned value may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun %domain-union @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return a new domain representing the union of the arguments.  The union
is the set of values present in one and/or the other argument.

The returned value may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun %domain-difference @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return a new domain representing the difference of the arguments.  The
difference is the set of values present in one or the other argument.

The returned value may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun %domain-complement @var{type} @var{domain} @var{domain-universe}
Return a new domain representing the complement of @var{domain} in the
space defined by @var{domain-universe}.  The returned value holds all
the items from @var{domain-universe} that are not in @var{domain}.

The returned value may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading List operations


@defun %range-for-each @var{type} @var{proc} @var{range}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the range.
@end defun


@defun %range-every @var{type} @var{proc} @var{range}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the range and return true if all the
return values are true.  The application stops at the first @false{}
return value.
@end defun


@defun %range-any @var{type} @var{proc} @var{range}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the range and return true if at least
one of the returned values is true.  The application stops at the first
true return value.
@end defun


@defun %range-fold @var{type} @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{range}
Fold @var{kons} over the values in the range.
@end defun


@defun %range->list @var{type} @var{range}
Return a list holding all the elements in the range.
@end defun


@defun %domain-for-each @var{type} @var{proc} @var{domain}
Apply @var{proc} to each element of @var{domain}.
@end defun


@defun %domain-every @var{type} @var{proc} @var{domain}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the domain and return true if all the
return values are true.  The application stops at the first @false{}
return value.
@end defun


@defun %domain-any @var{type} @var{proc} @var{domain}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the domain and return true if at least
one of the returned values is true.  The application stops at the first
true return value.
@end defun


@defun %domain-fold @var{type} @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{domain}
Fold @var{kons} over the values in the domain.
@end defun


@defun %domain->list @var{type} @var{domain}
Return a list holding all the elements in the domain.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Miscellaneous operations


@defun %range-concatenate @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Concatenate the ranges and return the resulting range.  It does not
matter which range has start less than the other.  It makes sense to
apply this function to ranges that satisfy @func{%range-contiguous?}.

The returned range may share some value with the original ranges.
@end defun

@c page
@node notes
@appendix Miscellaneous notes on everything


@menu
* notes nan::                   How to deal with not--a--number.
@end menu

@c page
@node notes nan
@appendixsec How to deal with not--a--number


@cindex How to deal with NaN
@cindex NaN, how to deal with it


The not--a--number value, @dfn{NaN} for short, represents the result of
a @emph{wrong} computation.  NaN can appear as literal in Scheme source
code as @samp{+nan.0} or @samp{-nan.0}, and it can be the result of an
expression composing Scheme arithmetic functions.  NaN has @strong{no
sign}, @samp{+nan.0} and @samp{-nan.0} have the same semantic meaning.

What follows is just a set of notes with no commitment to rigour in
Mathematics.  For more informations on NaN, start from:

@quotation
Wikipedia contributors.  ``Not a number''.  Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia.
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=NaN&oldid=303402207}
(accessed July 21, 2009).
@end quotation

@noindent
see also:

@quotation
Wikipedia contributors.  ``Division by zero''.  Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia.
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Division_by_zero&oldid=303258289}
(accessed July 21, 2009).
@end quotation

Being that NaN is a little weird, let's start by understanding how to
deal with infinities first.

@menu
* notes nan inf::               How to deal with infinities.
* notes nan nan::               Understanding not--a--number.
@end menu

@c page
@node notes nan inf
@appendixsubsec How to deal with infinities


Infinities can appear as literals in Scheme source code as @samp{+inf.0}
or @samp{-inf.0}, and they can be the result of an expression composing
Scheme arithmetic functions.

We have to distinguish between @dfn{number objects} as defined in
@rnrs{6} Scheme, and @dfn{numbers} as defined by Mathematics.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Infinities in the mathematical realm

We can take that Algebra defines @dfn{groups} as couples @math{(S, o)}
where: @math{S} is a set of mathematical entities, @math{o} is an
operation that composes two entities in @math{S} and evaluates to some
mathematical entity.  We can define the group @math{(R, +)}, where
@math{R} is the set of real numbers and @math{+} is the common addition,
because they are compliant with the following axioms:

@table @emph
@item Closure
For every couple of reals, their sum is a real.

@item Associativity
For every triplet of reals:

@example
a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c
@end example

@item Identity element
There exists a unique real @math{0} for which, for every real @math{a}:

@example
0 + a = a + 0 = a
@end example

@item Inverse element
For every real @math{a} there is a unique other real @math{b} for which:

@example
a + b = 0  =>  a = -b
@end example
@end table

@noindent
the existence of the inverse element for addition allows the definition
of subtraction.  The couple @math{(R, *)}, the reals with the ordinary
product, is also a group:

@table @emph
@item Closure
@example
\forall a, b \in R     a * b = c   c \in R
@end example

@item Associativity
@example
a * (b * c) = (a * b) * c
@end example

@item Identity element
@example
1 * a = a * 1 = a
@end example

@item Inverse element
@example
a * b = 1  =>  a = 1/b
@end example
@end table

@noindent
the existence of the inverse element for multiplication allows the
definition of division.

The triplet @math{(S, +, *)} in which @math{S} is a set of mathematical
entities, and @math{+} and @math{*} are composition operations with the
properties for a group, is called @dfn{field} if the following
additional axioms hold:

@table @emph
@item Commutativity
@example
a + b = b + a    a * b = b * a
@end example

@item Distributivity
@example
a * (b + c) = a * b + a * c
@end example
@end table

Human experience shows that it is convenient to state (simplified):
Every mathematical entity which is not compliant with the axioms of a
field is not a number.

Infinities are abstract mathematical entities which we can define
through the following disequations:

@example
\forall r \in R        -\infty < r < +\infty
@end example

@noindent
which means:

@itemize
@item
Positive infinity is comparable to numbers and it is greater than all
the positive numbers.

@item
Negative infinity is comparable to numbers and it is lesser than all the
negative number.
@end itemize

@noindent
we notice that the comparison operator @math{<} does not define a group,
because the result of @math{1 < 2} (as defined in Mathematics) is a
boolean value not a number.@footnote{This holds despite the fact that
many programming languages allow a disequation to yield a number.}

Despite the fact that we can compare them to numbers, @strong{infinities
are not numbers in the Mathematics sense.}  We can show this with the
following simple mathematical computation; let's consider the following
equation:

@example
4 + +\infty = x
@end example

@noindent
what should we take as value for @math{x}?  @math{x} cannot be a number
like, say, @math{8}, because:

@example
4 + +\infty = 8
=> +\infty = 8 - 4 = 4
=> +\infty = 4  Wrong!
@end example

@noindent
the only answer that tries to make some sense is @math{x = +\infty}, but
then:

@example
4 + +\infty = +\infty
=>  4 = +\infty - +\infty = 0
=>  4 = 0  Wrong!
@end example

@noindent
if we assume that infinities are numbers, some perfectly legal algebraic
manipulation yields a wrong result.  Human beings define mathematical
entities based on their usefulness; human experience shows that it is
more useful to avoid absurd equations like @math{4 = 0}, than to define
infinities as numbers.

So, infinities are @strong{not} numbers and the equation @math{4 +
\infty = x} is wrong in the sense that, in Mathematics, it is an error
to write it.

Mathematics is not ``perfect'', in the sense that it allows us to write
wrong equations; unfortunately we can recognise an equation as wrong
only trying to solve it.

Let's look at this equation:

@example
   4 - 3       1
------------ = - = x
12 - (4 + 8)   0
@end example

@noindent
what should we take as value for @math{x}?

If we had the limit:

@example
         1
\lim    --- = x      t > 0
t -> 0   t
@end example

@noindent
we would know that @math{x -> +\infty} (@math{x} approaches
@math{+\infty}, it is not equal to it).  Computing @math{1 / t} for
@math{t} smaller and smaller, yields a result that is a bigger and
bigger positive number, which approaches the mathematical entity greater
than all the positive numbers; that is @math{+\infty}.

But what about the straight @math{1 / 0 = x}?  The only mathematical
entity that makes sense as answer is @math{x = +\infty}, so @math{1 / 0}
is not a number.  We can demonstrate this with the following simple
computation:

@example
3 * (1 / 0) = y
=>  3 / 0 = y
=>  3 = y * 0 = 0
=>  3 = 0   Wrong!
@end example

@noindent
so, it is impossible for @math{1 / 0} and @math{y} to comply with the
axioms.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Infinities in the computer realm

Number objects are all the Scheme values for which the predicate
@func{number?} returns @true{}.  Both the infinities @samp{+inf.0} and
@samp{-inf.0} are number objects.  This way Scheme defines a class of
values which can be used as arguments to arithmetic procedures, and
which can potentially be the return value of an arithmetic procedure.

We acknowledged that, when a mathematical expression is non--compliant
with the axioms of definition of numbers, we can verify it by doing the
computation and checking the final or partial results.  A computer can
do the same by detecting, for example, if a division has @math{1} and
@math{0} as operands.

It turns out that making a computer processor interrupt a computation
when an expression is wrong, is inefficient.  So two special values were
defined to allow a computation to signal that special error:
@samp{+inf.0} and @samp{-inf.0}.

When a computation returns @samp{+inf.0} and @samp{-inf.0} we know that
the expression was wrong.  @rnrs{6} Scheme defines the following
conventional results:

@example
(div 1 0) @result{} error
(/   1 0) @result{} error

(/   1.0 0)   @result{} +inf.0
(/   1   0.0) @result{} +inf.0
(/   1.0 0.0) @result{} +inf.0
@end example

@noindent
when both the operands are exact, the expression raises an error; when
one of the operands is inexact, the expression yields infinity.

Special rules were defined to avoid to mistake a wrong computation for a
correct one; for example:

@example
(+ 44 (* 23 +inf.0)) @result{} +inf.0
(+ 44 (* 23 -inf.0)) @result{} -inf.0
@end example

@noindent
we know that both of these are wrong, but we also know that they are
wrong in that special way for which returning an infinity makes some
sense.  It is our responsibility to decide what to do.

The special rules makes it impossible for an expression to return a
finite number if one of the partial results was an infinity.  Sometimes
the composition of two infinities can yield an infinity with no
confusion; examples:

@example
(+ +inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +inf.0
(+ -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} -inf.0

(- +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +inf.0  ;like (+ +inf.0 +inf.0)
(- -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} -inf.0  ;like (+ -inf.0 -inf.0)
(- +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +inf.0  ;like (+ +inf.0 +inf.0)

(* +inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} -inf.0
(* +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} -inf.0
(* -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +inf.0
@end example

@noindent
but some expressions are difficult to deal with:

@example
(+ +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} ?
(+ -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} ?

(- -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} ?
(- -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} ?

(/ +inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} ?
(/ +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} ?
(/ -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} ?
(/ -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} ?
@end example

@noindent
neither a number nor an infinity makes sense as result here; we need
NaN.

@c page
@node notes nan nan
@appendixsubsec Understanding not--a--number


NaN is a special value used as result of a wrong expression.  We have
seen that the composition of infinities is not always defined; in those
cases the result is NaN:

@example
(+ +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(+ -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +nan.0

(- -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(- -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +nan.0

(/ +inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/ +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/ -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/ -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
@end example

@noindent
also it is:

@example
(div 0   0)   @result{} <error>
(/   0   0)   @result{} <error>
(/   0.0 0)   @result{} +nan.0
(/   0   0.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/   0.0 0.0) @result{} +nan.0
@end example

@noindent
because, in Mathematics, @math{0 / 0} is not compliant to the axioms:

@example
(0 / 0) = y
=>  0 * y = 0    y is not unique
@end example

Special rules were defined so that an arithmetic composition between NaN
and another number always returns NaN.  This allows us not to mistake a
wrong computation for a correct one:

@example
(+ 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0
(- 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0
(* 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/ 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0
@end example

@noindent
we have to beware, though, that some non--arithmetic function may hide
the NaN, and give rise to some surprise:

@example
(max 1 +nan.0) @result{} 1.0       ; ! the inexact 1!!
(min 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0    ; !?!
@end example

Scheme defines a predicate to test if a value is NaN, @func{nan?}.
@rnrs{6} Scheme mandates that:

@example
(= +nan.0 +nan.0) @result{} #f
(= +nan.0 z)      @result{} #f
@end example

@noindent
for ever number @var{z}.  The first is correct because a wrong
computation is not equal, in numerical sense, to another wrong
computation.

@rnrs{6} Scheme also states that:

@example
(eqv? +nan.0 +nan.0) @result{} <undefined>
@end example

@noindent
but currently all the LIMY Scheme implementations do:

@example
(eqv?   +nan.0 +nan.0) @result{} #t
(equal? +nan.0 +nan.0) @result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
notice that, by definition, @func{equal?} relies on @func{eqv?}.  This
allows us to do tests for wrong computations using not only @func{nan?};
this is especially useful when writing test suites (with more
complicated stuff than this):

@example
(check
    (list (+ 1 2) (/ 0.0 0.0))
  => '(3 +nan.0))
@end example

The behaviour of @func{eqv?} and @func{equal?} does not reduce our
ability to detect wrong expressions; we can always do:

@example
(let ((v (expression)))
  (cond
    ((= v 1)   (some-thing))
    ((nan? v)  (some-other-thing))
    (else      (yet-another-thing))))
@end example

@noindent
@func{eqv?} and @func{equal?} just allow us to do (by definition
@func{case} relies on @func{eqv?}):

@example
(case (expression)
  ((1 2)     (some-thing))
  ((+nan.0)  (some-other-thing))
  (else      (yet-another-thing)))

(let ((v (expression)))
  (cond
    ((= v 1)          (some-thing))
    ((eqv? v +nan.0)  (some-other-thing))
    (else             (yet-another-thing))))
@end example

@noindent
which, in some situations, is one more possibility to code the logic of
a function:

@example
(= (expression1) (expression2))
@result{} <bool> ; true if the results are equal numbers

(eqv? (expression1) (expression2))
@result{} <bool> ; true if the results are equal numbers
          ; or are both wrong expressions
@end example

@c page
@node binfmt
@appendix Launching programs directly


This appendix describes an optional feature of @value{PACKAGE} that
activates Scheme programs execution through the mechanism of the
@code{binfmt_misc} Linux kernel module.  It is available only on
Unix--like platforms running the Linux kernel.

By default the installation of the required files is disabled; to enable
it: at configuration time we must pass the @option{--binfmt} option to
the @command{configure} script.

The mechanism allows to run Scheme programs without explicitly invoking
the executable runtime program of the selected Scheme implementation.
It is a generalisation of the mechanism that runs shell scripts whose
file begins with @code{#!/bin/sh}.

@quotation
This appendix is derived from the original @code{binfmt_misc}
documentation text file by Richard Guenther.
@end quotation

@menu
* binfmt overview::             Overview of the mechanism.
* binfmt loading::              Loading the module.
* binfmt registry::             The registry.
* binfmt using::                Using the mechanism.
* binfmt control::              Controlling the mechanism.
* binfmt hints::                Hints.
* binfmt scheme::               Running Scheme programs.
@end menu


@c page
@node binfmt overview
@appendixsec Overview of the mechanism

@cindex Binary formats, kernel support
@cindex Binary executables, kernel support

This kernel feature allows us to invoke almost every program by simply
typing its name in the shell.  This includes for example compiled Java,
Python or Emacs programs, and of course Scheme programs.

The feature is implemented in the @code{binfmt_misc} kernel module; it
recognises the binary file type by matching some bytes at the beginning
of the file with a magic byte sequence (masking out specified bits) we
have supplied; it can also recognise a filename extension.


@c page
@node binfmt loading
@appendixsec Loading the module


If the module is installed on the system, we will find it in:

@example
/lib/modules/<version>/kernel/fs/binfmt_misc.ko
@end example

@noindent
and to load it we do (as root):

@example
/sbin/modprobe binfmt_misc
@end example

@noindent
for example on a Slackware Linux installation, loading can be done by
uncommenting the relevant line in @file{/etc/rc.d/rc.modules}.

Then we add the following line to @file{/etc/fstab}:

@example
none /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc binfmt_misc defaults 0 0
@end example

@noindent
so that the @code{binfmt_misc} directory can be mounted and will be
mounted when booting the system.  We can freely mount and unmount this
virtual file system with (as root):

@example
$ mount  /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc
$ umount /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc
@end example

@noindent
but this is rarely useful.  There are other means of enabling and
disabling the feature.


@c page
@node binfmt registry
@appendixsec The registry


To actually register a new binary type, we have to set up a string like:

@example
:name:type:offset:magic:mask:interpreter:
@end example

@noindent
and echo it to @file{/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/register}.  We can choose
the @code{:} character upon our needs and we can omit a field by simply
using an empty string; for example if we omit the offset and the mask
fields:

@example
:name:type::magic::interpreter:
@end example

Fields description follows.

@table @code
@item name
It is an identifier string.  A new @file{/proc} file will be created
with this name under @file{/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc}, and we can use it
to query and reset the configuration status.

@item type
It is the type of file recognition.  If set to @code{M} activates first
bytes recognition (also known as ``magic'' recognition); if set to
@code{E} activates file name extension recognition.

@item offset
It is the zero--based offset of the magic/mask in the file, counted in
bytes.  It is used only with magic recognition.  It defaults to zero.

@item magic
It is the byte sequence @code{binfmt_misc} will look for file
recognition.

The magic string may contain hex--encoded characters like @code{\x0a} or
@code{\xA4}.  When echoing the record from a shell environment, we will
have to quote the backslash: @code{\\x0a}.

If we chose filename extension matching, this is the extension to be
recognised (without the @code{.}, the @code{\x0a} specials are not
allowed).  Extension matching is case sensitive.

@item mask
It is a bitmask.  We can mask out some bits from matching by supplying a
string with the same length of @code{magic}.  The mask is ANDed with the
byte sequence from the file.  It defaults to @code{0xff}.

@item interpreter
It is the program that should be invoked with the binary as first
argument.  @strong{We have to specify the full path.}
@end table

There are some restrictions:

@itemize
@item
the whole @file{register} string may not exceed 255 characters;

@item
the magic must reside in the first 128 bytes of the file, i.e.
offset+size(magic) has to be less than 128;

@item
the interpreter string may not exceed 127 characters.
@end itemize


@c page
@node binfmt using
@appendixsec Using the mechanism


We may want to add the binary formats in one of the shell scripts that
are executed at system boot time.  For example, on a Slackware Linux
system we can use @file{/etc/rc.d/rc.local}.

To do it we can add to the shell script a chunk of code like the
following, which activates the mechanism for Scheme programs compiled
with Larceny:

@example
if test -f /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/register ; then
  test -f /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/LARCENY && \
    echo -1 >/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/LARCENY
  echo \
   ':LARCENY:M:2:fasl::/opt/larceny/last/scheme-script:' \
   >/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/register
fi
@end example

@noindent
which does the following:

@enumerate
@item
verify if the @code{binfmt_misc} kernel module has been loaded by
testing the existence of the @file{register} file; if the module is not
there, nothing happens;

@item
remove the configuration from the registry if it is already there; this
is done by testing the existence of the special file:

@example
/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/LARCENY
@end example

@noindent
echoing @code{-1} in it removes the Larceny record;

@item
echo the Larceny record into the registry with the following fields:

@table @code
@item LARCENY
It is the name of the special file representing the record in the
registry.

@item M
Activates first bytes recognition.

@item 2
The offset of the magic string into the file.

@item fasl
The magic string itself.

@item /opt/larceny/last/scheme-script
The full pathname to the Larceny @rnrs{6} runtime system executable.
@end table

We see that the @code{mask} field is set to the empty string, that is:
no mask is applied and @code{fasl} is matched literally.
@end enumerate

To determine the magic string for the Larceny compiled programs: compile
a program and read the compiled file, for example with @command{less} or
Emacs; we will see that the first bytes are @code{#!fasl}.

We have to care about the order of added entries: entries added later
are matched first.


@c page
@node binfmt control
@appendixsec Controlling the mechanism


@subsubheading Overall control

We can enable/disable the mechanism by echoing @code{0} (to disable) or
@code{1} (to enable) to the special file:

@example
/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/status
@end example

@noindent
that is, at the shell prompt and with superuser privileges:

@example
# enable
$ echo 1 >/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/status

# disable
$ echo 0 >/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/status
@end example

Applying the command @command{cat} to the @file{status} special file
tells us the current status of @code{binfmt_misc}:

@example
$ cat /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/status
enabled
@end example

We can remove all the entries from the registry echoing @code{-1} to
@file{status}; at the shell prompt and with superuser privileges:

@example
$ echo -1 >/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/status
@end example

@noindent
removing the entries and disabling the mechanism are two distinct
operations.


@subsubheading Specific format control

We can enable/disable recognition of a single binary format by echoing
@code{0} or @code{1} to the format specific special file under
@file{/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc}.  For example for @code{LARCENY}, at the
shell prompt and with superuser privileges:

@example
# enable
$ echo 1 >/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/LARCENY

# disable
$ echo 0 >/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/LARCENY
@end example

@noindent
disabled formats are @strong{not} removed from the internal table.

Applying the command @command{cat} to the format's special file tells us
the current status of that format and its configuration; for example for
@code{LARCENY}, at the shell prompt:

@example
$ cat /proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/LARCENY
@end example

We can remove a specific format entry from the registry echoing
@code{-1} to its special file; for @code{LARCENY} at the shell prompt
and with superuser privileges:

@example
$ echo -1 >/proc/sys/fs/binfmt_misc/LARCENY
@end example

@noindent
removing the entry and disabling the mechanism for a format are two
distinct operations.


@c page
@node binfmt hints
@appendixsec Hints


If we want to pass command line arguments to the runtime executable, we
must write a wrapper script for it.  There is no way to embed the
arguments in the registry record.

The runtime must @strong{not} look in the @env{PATH} environment
variable for the filename; the kernel passes it the full filename to
use.  Using the @env{PATH} can cause unexpected behaviour and be a
security hazard.


@c page
@node binfmt scheme
@appendixsec Running Scheme programs


The @code{binfmt_misc} mechanism can be used to run both source and
compiled Scheme programs.  @value{PACKAGE} adheres to the following
rules, which we can change by customising the files in the distribution:

@enumerate
@item
Ikarus Scheme source programs are recognised if the file starts with the
string @code{;;;!ikarus}, the @code{binfmt_misc} configuration will look
for the string @code{!ikarus} at zero--based offset 3 in the file.

@item
Larceny Scheme source programs are recognised if the file starts with
the string @code{;;;!larceny}, the @code{binfmt_misc} configuration will
look for the string @code{!larceny} at zero--based offset 3 in the file.

@item
Mosh Scheme source programs are recognised if the file starts with the
string @code{;;;!mosh}, the @code{binfmt_misc} configuration will look
for the string @code{!mosh} at zero--based offset 3 in the file.

@item
Ypsilon Scheme source programs are recognised if the file starts with
the string @code{;;;!ypsilon}, the @code{binfmt_misc} configuration will
look for the string @code{!ypsilon} at zero--based offset 3 in the file.

@item
Larceny Scheme compiled programs are recognised if the file starts with
the string @code{#!fasl}, the @code{binfmt_misc} configuration will look
for the string @code{fasl} at zero--based offset 2 in the file.

@item
The @code{binfmt_misc} configuration is stored in a Bourne shell script
(@file{/bin/sh} interpreter) named @file{rc.scheme} installed in the
@code{$(sysconfdir)/rc.d} directory.  If the default configuration is
not changed, this ends up being @file{/usr/local/etc/rc.d/rc.scheme}.

The script can be executed at system boot time and again later any
number of times: at each run it resets and reinitialises the
configuration for Scheme programs.

@item
Ikarus Scheme source programs are run through a Bourne shell script
(@file{/bin/sh} interpreter) named @file{ikarus-scheme-script} installed
in the @code{$(bindir)} directory.  The script calls Ikarus with:

@example
exec "$IKARUS" --r6rs-script "$@@"
@end example

@noindent
where @code{$IKARUS} is the Ikarus executable discovered by the
@command{configure} script of @value{PACKAGE}.

@item
Larceny Scheme both source and compiled programs are run through a
Bourne shell script (@file{/bin/sh} interpreter) named
@file{larceny-scheme-script} installed in the @code{$(bindir)}
directory.  The script calls Larceny with:

@example
exec "$LARCENY" -r6rs -program "$@@"
@end example

@noindent
where @code{$LARCENY} is the Larceny executable discovered by the
@command{configure} script of @value{PACKAGE}.

@item
Mosh Scheme source programs are run through a Bourne shell script
(@file{/bin/sh} interpreter) named @file{mosh-scheme-script} installed
in the @code{$(bindir)} directory.  The script calls Mosh with:

@example
exec "$MOSH" "$@@"
@end example

@noindent
where @code{$MOSH} is the Mosh executable discovered by the
@command{configure} script of @value{PACKAGE}.

@item
Ypsilon Scheme source programs are run through a Bourne shell script
(@file{/bin/sh} interpreter) named @file{ypsilon-scheme-script}
installed in the @code{$(bindir)} directory.  The script calls Ypsilon
with:

@example
exec "$YPSILON" --r6rs --compatible "$@@"
@end example

@noindent
where @code{$YPSILON} is the Ypsilon executable discovered by the
@command{configure} script of @value{PACKAGE}.
@end enumerate

The reasons for installing custom scripts are:

@enumerate
@item
A wrapper script allows more customisation of the execution environment
by setting system environment variables, for example to select a library
search path.

@item
A wrapper allows the selection of command line arguments that cannot be
embedded in the @code{binfmt_misc} registry entry.

@item
Installation of specific Scheme implementation @command{scheme-script}
executables is problematic because of file name collision.  For example:
both Larceny and Ikarus try to install a @command{scheme-script}
program, which one is installed?

The approach of @value{PACKAGE} is to use none of those and rely on
custom scripts.
@end enumerate

The files installed by @value{PACKAGE} provide no way to run all the
(portable) @rnrs{6} Scheme programs with a single Scheme implementation.
But the installed files can be easily customised to do so.  Let's say
that we want to run all the @rnrs{6} Scheme programs with Ypsilon; we
can add the following chunk of code to @file{rc.scheme}:

@example
BINFMT_SCHEME=$@{BINFMT_DIR@}/R6RS_SCHEME

if test "$@{BINFMT_ENABLE_YPSILON@}" = yes ; then
    echo -n enabling binfmt R6RS Scheme scripts execution...
    test -f $@{BINFMT_SCHEME@} && echo -1 >$@{BINFMT_SCHEME@}
    echo ":R6RS_SCHEME:M:3:!scheme::$@{BINFMT_PROG_YPSILON@}:" \
        >$@{BINFMT_REGISTER@}
    echo done
else
    echo skipping binfmt R6RS Scheme programs execution
fi
@end example

@noindent
that way all the files starting with @code{;;;!scheme} are launched with
the Ypsilon executable.

@c page
@node credits
@appendix Credits


This appendix collects license notices and copyright assignments for
code and documentation included in @value{PACKAGE}.


@subsubheading Language and implementations

Scheme is a statically scoped and properly tail--recursive dialect of
the Lisp programming language invented by Guy Lewis Steele Jr. and
Gerald Jay Sussman.  It was designed to have an exceptionally clear and
simple semantics and few different ways to form expressions.

Several libraries depend upon the port to @rnrs{6} of the Scheme
Requests For Implementation (@srfi{}).  The original @srfi{} code is the
work of many authors, reference of which you can find the at the top of
the source code files; the port to @rnrs{6} included in this project is
the work of Derick Eddington.

@table @code
@item Ikarus
An almost @rnrs{6} compliant implementation of the Scheme programming
language.  It is the creation of Abdulaziz Ghuloum.

@item Larceny
An also @rnrs{6} compliant implementation of the Scheme programming
language.  It is the creation of William D.  Clinger, Lars T Hansen and
Lightship Software, Incorporated, with contributions by other people.

@item Mosh
An @rnrs{6} compliant implementation of the Scheme programming language.
It is the creation of Taro Minowa (higepon).

@item Ypsilon
An @rnrs{6} compliant implementation of the Scheme programming language.
It is the creation of Yoshikatsu Fujita at LittleWing Company.
@end table

@value{PACKAGE} is the creation of Marco Maggi.  If this work exists, it
is because of the @gnu{} Software tools he uses all the time.


@subsubheading Documentation: language definition, base and standard library

The chapters @ref{lang,The Scheme language}, @ref{baselib,Base library}
and @ref{stdlib,Standard library} are derived from the original
``Revised^6 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme'' document and the
original ``Revised^6 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme ----
Standard Libraries'', authored by the following people:

@quotation
@noindent
MICHAEL SPERBER@*
R. KENT DYBVIG, MATTHEW FLATT, ANTON VAN STRAATEN@*
(Editors)

@noindent
RICHARD KELSEY, WILLIAM CLINGER, JONATHAN REES@*
(Editors, Revised^5 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme)

@noindent
ROBERT BRUCE FINDLER, JACOB MATTHEWS@*
(Authors, formal semantics)
@end quotation

@noindent
with various contributions by the following people:

@quotation
Hal Abelson, Norman Adams, David Bartley, Gary Brooks, William Clinger,
Daniel Friedman, Robert Halstead, Chris Hanson, Christopher Haynes,
Eugene Kohlbecker, Don Oxley, Kent Pitman, Jonathan Rees, Guillermo
Rozas, Guy L. Steele Jr., Gerald Jay Sussman, and Mitchell Wand.
@end quotation

@noindent
and a lot of discussions and debates by the Scheme community.  According
to the following quotation from the original document:

@quotation
We intend this report to belong to the entire Scheme community, and so
we grant permission to copy it in whole or in part without fee.  In
particular, we encourage implementors of Scheme to use this report as a
starting point for manuals and other documentation, modifying it as
necessary.
@end quotation

@noindent
the documents are meant to be in the public domain.  They are available
at:

@center @url{http://www.r6rs.org/}
@center @url{http://www.r6rs.org/r6rs-errata.html}


@subsubheading Documentation: Scheme requests for implementation

The original @srfi{} documents are the work of many authors and are
available at:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/}

@noindent
this document embeds and modifies some of them.  The original document
licenses are included in this document, and can be found in the relevant
sections.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{0}: Feature based conditional expansion construct

Copyright @copyright{} 1999 Marc Feeley.  All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or
assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included
on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself
may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice
or references to the Scheme Request For Implementation process or
editors, except as needed for the purpose of developing SRFIs in which
case the procedures for copyrights defined in the SRFI process must be
followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
revoked by the authors or their successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
``AS IS'' basis and THE AUTHOR AND THE SRFI EDITORS DISCLAIM ALL
WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY
RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{1}: List library

Certain portions of the @ansrfi{1} document (the specific, marked
segments of text describing the R5RS procedures) were adapted with
permission from the @rnrs{5} report.

All other text is copyright @copyright{} 1998, 1999 Olin Shivers.  All
Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{2}: An @func{and} with local bindings

Copyright @copyright{} 1998 Oleg Kiselyov.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{8}: Binding multiple values

Copyright @copyright{} 1999 John David Stone.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{13}: Strings library

Certain portions of this document, the specific, marked segments of text
describing the @rnrs{5} procedures, were adapted with permission from
the @rnrs{5} report.

All other text is copyright @copyright{} 1998, 1999, 2000 Olin Shivers.
All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{14}: Character sets

Certain portions of this document---the specific, marked segments of
text describing the @rnrs{5} procedures---were adapted with permission
from the @rnrs{5} report editors.

All other text is Copyright @copyright{} 1998, 1999, 2000 Olin Shivers.
All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{26}: Notation for specializing parameters without currying

Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Sebastian Egner.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{27}: Sources of random bits

Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Sebastian Egner.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{31}: A special form for recursive evaluation

Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Dr. Mirko Luedde
@email{Mirko.Luedde@@SAP.com}.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{38}: External representation for data with shared structure

Copyright @copyright{} 2003 Ray Dillinger.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{39}: Parameter objects

Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Marc Feeley.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{42}: Eager comprehensions

Copyright @copyright{} 2003 Sebastian Egner.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{43}: Vectors library

Copyright @copyright{} 2003 Taylor Campbell.  All rights reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{67}: Compare procedures

Copyright @copyright{} 2005 Sebastian Egner @email{sebastian.egner@@philips.com}@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2005 Jens Axel Soegaard @email{jensaxel@@soegaard.net}.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{78}: Library for lightweight test suites

Copyright @copyright{} 2005--2006 Sebastian Egner.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @ansrfi{98}: Environment variables

Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Taro Minowa (Higepon).  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading IrRegular Expressions

Copyright @copyright{} 2005--2008 Alex Shinn.  All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

@enumerate
@item
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

@item
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the
distribution.

@item
The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
@end enumerate

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Pregexp, Portable Regular Expressions for Scheme and Common Lisp

Copyright @copyright{} 1999-2005 Dorai Sitaram.  All rights reserved.

Permission to copy, modify, distribute, and use this work or a modified
copy of this work, for any purpose, is hereby granted, provided that the
copy includes this copyright notice, and in the case of a modified copy,
also includes a notice of modification.  This work is provided as is,
with no warranty of any kind.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading SILex

The section on the @library{silex} library is derived from the original
documentation os SILex.

Copyright @copyright{} 2001 Danny Dube' @email{danny.dube@@ift.ulaval.ca}

SILex is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the @gnu{} General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Packrat parser

Copyright @copyright{} 2004, 2005 Tony Garnock-Jones @email{tonyg@@kcbbs.gen.nz}@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2005 LShift Ltd. @email{query@@lshift.net}

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Licenses.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@include gpl-3.0.texiinc
@include fdl-1.3.texiinc


@c page
@node references
@appendix Bibliography and references


@noindent
@emph{Revised^6 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme.}  Michael
Sperber and R. Kent Dybvig and Matthew Flatt and Anton Van Straaten
(Editors).  2007.

@noindent
@emph{Revised^6 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme---Standard
Libraries.}  Michael Sperber and R. Kent Dybvig and Matthew Flatt and
Anton Van Straaten (Editors). 2007.

@noindent
@emph{Scheme Request for Implementation 41: Streams.}  Philip L. Bewig.
2007.  @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-41/srfi-41.html}

@noindent
@bibref{DYBGUA} @emph{Guardians in a generation--based garbage
collector}.  R. Kent Dybvig and Carl Bruggeman and David Eby.  PLDI '93,
pages 207--216, June 1993.  Introduces guardians and describes the
implementation of guardians and weak pairs in Chez Scheme.

@noindent
@emph{Don't stop the BiBOP: Flexible and efficient storage management
for dynamically--typed languages.}  R. Kent Dybvig and David Eby and
Carl Bruggeman.  Technical Report 400, Indiana University, March 1994.
Describes Chez Scheme's storage management system.

@noindent
@emph{Generation Friendly Eq Hash Tables.}  Abdulaziz Ghuloum and
R. Kent Dybvig. In @emph{Proceedings of the 2007 Workshop on Scheme and
Functional Programming}, pages 207--216.  Universite Laval Technical
Report DIUL-RT-0701, 2007.

@noindent
@emph{Extending the Scope of Syntactic Abstraction.}  Oscar Waddell.
PhD thesis, Indiana University Computer Science Department, August 1999.
@url{http://www.cs.indiana.edu/~owaddell/papers/thesis.ps.gz}

@noindent
@emph{Extending the Scope of Syntactic Abstraction.}  Oscar Waddell and
R. Kent Dybvig.  In @emph{Conference Record of POPL'99: The 26th ACM
SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages}, pages
203--213, January 1999.
@url{http://www.cs.indiana.edu/~dyb/papers/popl99.ps.gz}

@noindent
@emph{Chez Scheme Version 7 User's Guide.}  R. Kent Dybvig.  Cadence
Research Systems, 2005.  User's guide and reference manual for Chez
Scheme Version 7.  @url{http://www.scheme.com/csug7/}

@noindent
@emph{Implicit phasing for R6RS libraries.}  Abdulaziz Ghuloum and
R. Kent Dybvig.  In @emph{ICFP '07: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGPLAN
international conference on Functional programming}, pages 303--314.
New York, NY, USA, 2007.  ACM.



@c page
@node examples
@appendix Scheme programming examples


@menu
* examples macros::             Exploring macro mechanisms.
@end menu


@c page
@node examples macros
@appendixsec Exploring macro mechanisms


The examples in this section are meant neither to be useful nor to be
meaningful; their only purpose is to highlight how the
@func{define-syntax}, @func{syntax-case} and @func{syntax} mechanism
works.

When the examples are especially simple, or do not require particular
features of @func{syntax-case}, the @func{syntax-rules} transformer is
used.  This is the case of some of the pattern examples.


@menu
* examples macros phases::      Bits about phases.
* examples macros underscore::  About the underscore.
* examples macros patterns::    About writing patterns.
* examples macros literals::    About literal identifiers.
* examples macros syntax::      Syntax objects and you.
@end menu



@c page
@node examples macros phases
@appendixsubsec Bits about phases


@quotation
@strong{The following ramblings do not aim at being rigorous.}
@end quotation

@noindent
Let's look at this code:

@example
(import (rnrs))

(define (gasp arg)
  arg)

(define (gulp arg)
  (gasp arg))

(gulp 123)
@end example

@noindent
Oll Korrect: we define two functions, one of which invokes the other in
its body.  Now look at this:

@example
(import (rnrs))

(let ()
  (define (gasp arg)
    arg)
  #f)

(let ()
  (define (gulp arg)
    (gasp arg))
  (gulp 123))
@end example

@noindent
this will not work: when @func{gulp} is invoked @func{gasp} does not
exist anymore, because it is ``local'' to the first @func{let}.  The two
functions exist at different ``times'' (using correct jargon for this
case: they belong to distinct @emph{regions}).

Let's state this clearly: Scheme allows sets of functions to exist at
different times.  With more generality: Scheme allows sets of
identifier/value bindings to exist at different times.  Fine.  Now we
know that, technologically speaking, we have this option.

In the two--@func{let} example above the two ``times'', the two regions,
correspond to two distinct chunks of code: the @func{let} forms.  We ask
ourselves if it is possible to make two set of functions exist at
different times in the same chunk of code; with this feature, we could
use the first set to compute values and build code that are used by the
second set.  It would be similar to preprocessing C language files with
the C language preprocessor.  The answer is that: yes, it is possible.

Inhabitants of the Scheme Pantheon decided that, in the same way as
@func{let} ``times'' are called @emph{regions}, these other ``times''
are called @emph{phases}.

To do such a thing we have to mark, select, partition, discriminate,
paint with different colours the functions that are meant to belong to
different phases.  We can imagine that there are special versions of
@func{define} and @func{eval} that select a phase:

@example
;; Imaginary code.

(define-for-phase-1 (gasp arg1)
  (cons 1 arg1))

(define-for-phase-2 (gulp arg2)
  (cons 2 (gasp arg2)))

(evaluate-in-phase-2
  (gulp 9))
@end example

@noindent
so that after evaluation phase @code{1} is finished, we have code
equivalent to:

@example
;; Imaginary code.

(define-for-phase-2 (gulp arg)
  (cons 2 (cons 1 arg)))

(evaluate-in-phase-2
  (gulp 9))
@end example

@noindent
which is equivalent to:

@example
;; Imaginary code.

(define (gulp arg)
  (cons 2 (cons 1 arg)))

(gulp 9)
@end example

@noindent
which is ``ordinary'' Scheme code that computes the improper list
@code{(2 1 . 9)}.

It turns out that code like this is really ugly, and the Scheme Pantheon
decided that a chunk of code, by itself, should have only two phases
called @code{expand} and @code{run}.  The @code{run} phase is the normal
one: it is when the program should do whatever it is meant to do (talk
to the user, download web pages, etc).  The @code{expand} phase is the
special one: it is when the program does the precomputation of values
and code.

So it is enough to mark one set of functions, and the Pantheon decided
that it is the @code{expand} set that must be marked differently.  Let's
look at:

@example
(import (rnrs) (checks))
(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

(define-syntax expand-time-func
  (lambda (syntax-object)        ;; this is the expand
    123))                        ;; phase function

(define (run-time-func arg)
  (expand-time-func arg))

(check
 (run-time-func 456)
 => 123)

(check-report)
@end example

@noindent
where we have marked @func{expand-time-func} to exist at @code{expand}
time using @func{define-syntax}.  After evaluation phase @code{expand}
is finished the code is equivalent to:

@example
(import (rnrs) (checks))
(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

(define (run-time-func arg)
  123)

(check
 (run-time-func 456)
 => 123)

(check-report)
@end example

@noindent
and everything works as we expect.

The single argument that is handed to the @code{expand} time function is
a weird beast called ``syntax object''.  All this section about
@func{syntax-case} deals with using syntax objects.

In the example above, it looks like @func{expand-time-func} is applied
to the @code{arg} argument of @func{run-time-func}; but what is actually
handed to the function is a syntax object holding information about the
whole form @code{(expand-time-func arg)} and the context where it was
located.

There are functions to extract and use values in the syntax object.  For
example the following script evaluates successfully:

@example
(import (rnrs) (checks))
(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

(define-syntax expand-time-func
  (lambda (syntax-object)
    (caddr (syntax->datum syntax-object))))

(define (run-time-func arg)
  (expand-time-func arg 123))

(check
 (run-time-func 456)
 => '123)

(check-report)
@end example



@c page
@node examples macros underscore
@appendixsubsec About the underscore


It is stated that:

@quotation
Underscores, @code{_}, also match arbitrary input subforms but are not
pattern variables and so cannot be used to refer to those elements.
Multiple underscores may appear in a @meta{pattern}.
@end quotation

@noindent
@xref{baselib transformers,syntax-rules}.  It means that the following
script will evaluate successfully:

@example
(import (rnrs) (checks))
(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

(check
 (let ()
   (define-syntax doit
     (syntax-rules ()
       ((doit _) 1)))

   (list (doit '(a b c))
         (doit 2)
         (doit '(a (b (c)) d (e)))))
 => '(1 1 1))

(check
 (let ()
   (define-syntax doit
     (syntax-rules ()
       ((doit _ _) 1)))

   (list (doit '(a b c) '(d e f))
         (doit 1 2)))
 => '(1 1))

(check-report)
@end example

The use of @code{_} allows us not to invent pattern variable names for
subpatterns that we do not care about in a @meta{syntax rule}.  In the
following:

@example
(define-syntax doit
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((doit ?arg)
     1)))
@end example

@noindent
we do not care about the actual value of @code{?arg}, so why should we
be forced to invent a name for it?  Better to write:

@example
(define-syntax doit
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((doit _)
     1)))
@end example

It is customary to use @code{_} in the pattern of @meta{syntax rule}s as
a placeholder for the macro use name:

@example
(define-syntax doit
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?arg)
     (list ?arg))))
@end example

@noindent
but there is nothing special about this: it is convenient because one
has only one char to type.  Notice that when writing @func{syntax-case}
forms using @code{_} as first subpattern of patterns, while still
possible, may need to be avoided because there is the need to use the
macro use identifier, and it is not possible to do it with @code{_}.



@c page
@node examples macros patterns
@appendixsubsec About writing patterns


@subsubheading At least one element in a subpattern with ellipsis


When we want to specify a pattern or subpattern that matches at least
one element from the input form we have to use @code{?elm0 ?elm ...};
this is because the @code{?elm ...} subpattern matches @strong{zero} or
more elements.  So the following correctly returns @code{error} when
zero elements are used:

@example
(import (rnrs) (checks))
(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

(define-syntax doit
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?elm0 ?elm ...)
     '(?elm0 ?elm ...))
    ((_ . ?rest)
     'error)))

(check (doit 1)         => '(1))
(check (doit 1 2 3)     => '(1 2 3))
(check (doit)           => 'error)

(check-report)
@end example

@noindent
while the following happily matches zero arguments to the macro:

@example
(import (rnrs) (checks))
(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

(define-syntax doit
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?elm ...)
     '(?elm ...))
    ((_ . ?rest)
     'error)))

(check (doit 1)         => '(1))
(check (doit 1 2 3)     => '(1 2 3))
(check (doit)           => '())

(check-report)
@end example

@noindent
here the @code{(_ . ?rest)} is never matched.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------


@subsubheading Matching proper lists but not improper lists


When the @code{?arg ...} and @code{. ?args} subpatterns appear at the
end of a list, they both match all the other elements (the cdr), which
can be zero or more.  There is one difference: while @code{?arg ...}
matches only a proper list, @code{. ?args} matches both proper and
improper lists.  So the following works always:

@example
(import (rnrs) (checks))
(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

(define-syntax doit
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ . ?args)
     '?args)))

(check (doit 1)         => '(1))
(check (doit 1 2 3)     => '(1 2 3))
(check (doit 1 . 2)     => '(1 . 2))

(check-report)
@end example

@noindent
but the following raises an ``invalid syntax'' error in the improper
list check:

@example
(import (rnrs) (checks))
(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

(define-syntax doit
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?arg ...)
     '(?arg ...))))

(check (doit 1)         => '(1))
(check (doit 1 2 3)     => '(1 2 3))
(check (doit 1 . 2)     => '(1 . 2))

(check-report)
@end example

Notice that the @meta{formals} argument of a @func{lambda} can be an
improper list when we use the @code{(arg1 arg2 . args)} form to bind the
rest arguments to @code{args}.  So to properly match @meta{formals} the
general @meta{formals} we have to use the @code{?arg . ?args}
subpattern.



@c page
@node examples macros literals
@appendixsubsec About literal identifiers


It is stated that:

@quotation
A @meta{literal} identifier matches an input subform if and only if the
input subform is an identifier and either both its occurrence in the
input expression and its occurrence in the list of literals have the
same lexical binding, or the two identifiers have the same name and both
have no lexical binding.
@end quotation

@noindent
@xref{baselib transformers,syntax-rules}.  Literal identifiers are
useful to ``mark'' subforms of the input form that have special meaning.
In a way, @meta{literal}s can act as comments.

The following script will evaluate successfully:

@example
(import (rnrs) (checks))
(check-set-mode! 'report-failed)

;;;In this  example 'alpha'  has NO lexical  binding in  both the
;;;literals list of SYNTAX-RULES and the input expression.
(check
 (let ()
   (define-syntax doit
     (syntax-rules (alpha)
       ((_ ?arg1 (alpha ?arg2))
        (list ?arg1 ?arg2))))

   (doit 1 (alpha 2)))
 => '(1 2))

;;;In this example  'alpha' has THE SAME lexical  binding in both
;;;the literals list of SYNTAX-RULES and the input expression.
(check
 (let ((alpha 123))
   (define-syntax doit
     (syntax-rules (alpha)
       ((_ ?arg1 (alpha ?arg2))
        (list ?arg1 ?arg2))))

   (doit 1 (alpha 2)))
 => '(1 2))

(check-report)
@end example

@noindent
while both the following examples will fail with a compile time error,
because @code{alpha} has @strong{different} lexical bindings in the
literals list of @func{syntax-rules} and the input expression:

@example
(check
 (let ()
   (define-syntax doit
     (syntax-rules (alpha)
       ((_ ?arg1 (alpha ?arg2))
        (list ?arg1 ?arg2))))

   (let ((alpha 123))
     (doit 1 (alpha 2))))
 => '(1 2))

(check
 (let ()
   (define-syntax doit
     (let ((alpha 123))
       (syntax-rules (alpha)
         ((_ ?arg1 (alpha ?arg2))
          (list ?arg1 ?arg2)))))

     (doit 1 (alpha 2)))
 => '(1 2))
@end example

@noindent
quoting the literal makes no difference:

@example
(check
 (let ()
   (define-syntax doit
     (syntax-rules (alpha)
       ((_ ?arg1 ((quote alpha) ?arg2))
        (list ?arg1 ?arg2))))

   (let ((alpha 123))
     (doit 1 ((quote alpha) 2))))
 => '(1 2))
@end example

@noindent
it is still a compile time error.

@c page
@node examples macros syntax
@appendixsubsec Syntax objects and you


Syntax objects are constructed with @func{syntax}.


@menu
* examples macros syntax not::   What we do not do.
@end menu


@c page
@node examples macros syntax not
@appendixsubsubsec What we do not do


We have to make clear that we cannot extract at will informations from a
syntax object; only in particular context we can do something with
them.  So the following is useless:

@example
(define (doit stx)
  ---)

(let ((alpha 1)
      (beta  2)
      (delta 3))
  (doit (syntax (alpha beta delta))))
@end example

@noindent
the expansion of @func{syntax} (which is a syntax, not a function)
creates a syntax object that is used as argument for @func{doit}; but we
can do nothing useful with it in the body of @func{doit}, neither for
actual solution of programming problems, nor to show how syntax objects
work.

The following checks will work, but they only demonstrate that we can
shoot the breeze with @func{syntax} and @func{syntax->datum}:

@example
(check
    (let ()
      (define (doit stx)
        (syntax-case stx ()
          ((use ?arg0 ?arg1)
           (syntax->datum (syntax ?arg0)))))
      (let ((alpha 1)
            (beta  2)
            (delta 3))
        (doit (syntax (alpha beta delta)))))
  => 'beta)

(check
    (let ()
      (define (doit stx)
        (syntax-case stx ()
          ((use ?arg0 ?arg1)
           (list (syntax->datum (syntax use))
                 (syntax->datum (syntax ?arg0))
                 (syntax->datum (syntax ?arg1))))))
      (let ((alpha 1)
            (beta  2)
            (delta 3))
        (doit (syntax (alpha beta delta)))))
  => '(alpha beta delta))

(check
    (let ()
      (define (doit stx)
        (syntax-case stx ()
          ((use ?arg0 ?arg1)
           (syntax->datum (syntax (use ?arg0 ?arg1))))))
      (let ((alpha 1)
            (beta  2)
            (delta 3))
        (doit (syntax (alpha beta delta)))))
  => '(alpha beta delta))
@end example

@c page
@node concept index
@appendix An entry for each concept

@printindex cp

@node function index
@appendix An entry for each function.

@printindex fn

@node variable index
@appendix An entry for each variable.

@printindex vr

@node type index
@appendix An entry for each type.

@printindex tp

@contents
@bye

@c end of file
@c Local Variables:
@c mode: texinfo
@c TeX-master: t
@c End:
