\input texinfo.tex
@c %**start of header
@setfilename nausicaa-libxml2.info
@settitle Libxml2 for Nausicaa
@c %**end of header

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@include version.texiinc

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c License macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gnu{}
@acronym{GNU}
@end macro

@macro gpl{}
@acronym{GPL}
@end macro

@macro fdl{}
@acronym{FDL}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Special notes.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro forunix{}
@strong{Unix:}
@end macro

@macro fixme{TEXT}
@strong{FIXME: \TEXT\}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme related macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rnrs{VERSION}
@acronym{R\VERSION\RS}
@end macro

@macro rsix{}
Revised^6 Report on the algorithmic language Scheme
@end macro

@macro repl{}
@acronym{REPL}
@end macro

@macro srfi{}
@acronym{SRFI}
@end macro

@c Separating the @srfi{} macro from the number with a '--' rather than
@c a '-'  makes the expansion look  ugly in menu entries  under the Info
@c reader.  IMHO  this should not happen,  but it does; so  we live with
@c this, because the main purpose of this document is to provide an Info
@c version.
@macro ansrfi{NUM}
@srfi{}-\NUM\
@end macro

@macro clos{}
@acronym{CLOS}
@end macro

@macro library{SPEC}
@code{(\SPEC\)}
@end macro

@macro ffi{}
@acronym{FFI}
@end macro

@macro class{NAME}
@code{<\NAME\>}
@end macro

@macro condition{NAME}
@code{&\NAME\}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Miscellaneous acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro ansi{}
@acronym{ANSI}
@end macro

@macro api{}
@acronym{API}
@end macro

@c Remember that @url is already used by Texinfo.
@macro aurl{}
@acronym{URL}
@end macro

@macro ascii{}
@acronym{ASCII}
@end macro

@macro cpu{}
@acronym{CPU}
@end macro

@macro csv{}
@acronym{CSV}
@end macro

@macro ieee{}
@acronym{IEEE}
@end macro

@macro iso{}
@acronym{ISO}
@end macro

@macro posix{}
@acronym{POSIX}
@end macro

@macro rfc{}
@acronym{RFC}
@end macro

@macro sql{}
@acronym{SQL}
@end macro

@macro utf{}
@acronym{UTF}
@end macro

@macro utc{}
@acronym{UTC}
@end macro

@macro tai{}
@acronym{TAI}
@end macro

@macro axml{}
@acronym{XML}
@end macro

@macro ahtml{}
@acronym{HTML}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Software acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gmp{}
@acronym{GMP}
@end macro

@macro gcc{}
@acronym{GCC}
@end macro

@macro gnome{}
@acronym{GNOME}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Network related acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro http{}
@acronym{HTTP}
@end macro

@macro ftp{}
@acronym{FTP}
@end macro

@macro ip{}
@acronym{IP}
@end macro

@macro ssh{}
@acronym{SSH}
@end macro

@macro ssl{}
@acronym{SSL}
@end macro

@macro tcp{}
@acronym{TCP}
@end macro

@macro tls{}
@acronym{TLS}
@end macro

@macro udp{}
@acronym{UDP}
@end macro

@macro smtp{}
@acronym{SMTP}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro func{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro snull{}
@code{()}
@end macro

@macro true{}
@code{#t}
@end macro

@macro false{}
@code{#f}
@end macro

@macro keyword{NAME}
@code{#:\NAME\}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c C language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro cfunc{NAME}
@code{\NAME\()}
@end macro

@macro cnull{}
@code{NULL}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros for references to external documents.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro glibcref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,libc}
@end macro

@c @macro rsixref{NODE, TITLE}
@c @ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,r6rs}
@c @end macro

@macro bibref{TAG}
@code{[\TAG\]}
@end macro

@macro autoconfref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,autoconf}
@end macro

@macro nauref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,nausicaa}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c RNRS document macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rsixlibrary{THING}
@code{(rnrs \THING\ (6))}
@end macro

@macro arbno{THING}
\THING\*
@end macro

@macro atleastone{THING}
\THING\+
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used in normal text.

@macro meta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro metai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro metaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro metaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used inside @example environment and @samp directives.

@macro cmeta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro cmetai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro cmetaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro cmetaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used inside argument lists.

@macro ameta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro ametai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro ametaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro ametaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro hyper{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro hyperi{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro hyperii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro hyperiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@macro hypern{THING}
<\THING\n>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro varo{THING}
@var{\THING\0}
@end macro

@macro vari{THING}
@var{\THING\1}
@end macro

@macro varii{THING}
@var{\THING\2}
@end macro

@macro variii{THING}
@var{\THING\3}
@end macro

@macro variv{THING}
@var{\THING\4}
@end macro

@macro varn{THING}
@var{\THING\n}
@end macro

@macro vark{THING}
@var{\THING\k}
@end macro

@macro varj{THING}
@var{\THING\j}
@end macro


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Values.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@set TITLE                      Libxml2 for Nausicaa

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the full
@c name of this package.
@set PACKAGE                    Nausicaa/Libxml2

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE_NICKNAME} whenever we need to include
@c the nickname of the project: the name that is used to compose the
@c distribution tarball or the web address.
@set PACKAGE_NICKNAME           nausicaa-libxml2

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR} whenever we need to include the list of
@c authors of this document.
@set AUTHOR                     Marco Maggi

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL} whenever we need to include the
@c email of the *single* author of this document.
@set AUTHOR_EMAIL               @email{marco.maggi-ipsu@@poste.it}

@c To be used as @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} whenever we need to include the
@c list of copyright years.
@set COPYRIGHT_YEARS            2009, 2010

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Copyright notice.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
@noindent
This document describes version @version{} of @value{PACKAGE}, a
distribution of libraries for @rnrs{6} Scheme implementations; it
provides a binding to the Libxml2 C language library, the @axml{}
toolkit for the @gnome{} project.  It is built upon Nausicaa/Scheme,
making use of its foreign--functions interface.

The libraries support Ikarus, Mosh and Ypsilon Scheme; the package
supports @gnu{}+Linux systems.

The package is distributed under the terms of the @gnu{} General Public
License (@gpl{}) and can be downloaded from:

@center @url{http://github.com/marcomaggi/nausicaa/downloads}

@noindent
the project home page of Nausicaa is at:

@center @url{http://marcomaggi.github.com/nausicaa.html}

@noindent
development of Nausicaa takes place at:

@center @url{http://github.com/marcomaggi/nausicaa/tree/master}

@noindent
Libxml2 is available at:

@center @url{http://xmlsoft.org/}

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} by @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the @gnu{} Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with
Invariant Sections being ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License'' and
``@gnu{} General Public License'', no Front--Cover Texts, and no
Back--Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Headers.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Revision @version{}
@author @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ifinfo
@dircategory Development
@direntry
* nausicaa-libxml2: (nausicaa-libxml2).    Libxml2 for Nausicaa.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ignore
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@end ignore

@c page
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

@insertcopying

@menu
* overview::                    Overview of the package.
* constants::                   Constant values.
* structs::                     Accessing data structures.
* primitives::                  Primitive functions.
* callbacks::                   Callback makers.
* examples::                    Usage examples.

Appendices

* Package License::             GNU General Public License.
* Documentation License::       GNU Free Documentation License.
* references::                  Bibliography and references.

Indexes

* concept index::               An entry for each concept.
* function index::              An entry for each function.
* variable index::              An entry for each variable.
* type index::                  An entry for each type.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@c page
@node overview
@chapter Overview of the package


This document describes version @version{} of @value{PACKAGE}, is a
distribution of libraries for @rnrs{6} Scheme implementations; it
provides a binding to the Libxml2 C language library, the @axml{}
toolkit for the @gnome{} project.  It is built upon Nausicaa/Scheme,
making use of its foreign--functions interface.

The libraries support Ikarus, Mosh and Ypsilon Scheme; the package
supports @gnu{}+Linux systems.

The installed libraries are:

@table @library
@item xml libxml2 shared-object
Exports the single binding @code{libxml2-shared-object} which
references the foreign shared library.

@item xml libxml2 sizeof
Exports bindings to constant values and data structures accessors.

@item xml libxml2 platform
Exports one binding for each foreign function; the Scheme functions have
the same name of the C functions, so @cfunc{xmlCheckVersion} is availale
as @func{xmlCheckVersion}.  This library makes the original Libxml2
documentation relevant for this package.

@item xml libxml2 primitives
Exports one binding for each foreign function, implementing marshaling
of arguments and return values.  The Scheme functions have the same name
of the C functions, buth with lower case, underscores converted to
dashes and words separated by dashes; so @cfunc{xmlCheckVersion} is
availale as @func{xml-check-version}.

@item xml libxml2
Compound library exporting the high--level @api{}; it reexports bindings
from the @samp{primitives} library and the constant values from the
@samp{sizeof} library.

@item xml libxml2 compensated
Exports bindings to constructor functions making use of the
@library{compensations} library from Nausicaa/Scheme.
@nauref{compensations, Compensation stacks}.
@end table

The following program: initialises the library checking the revision
number; does nothing; finalises the library internals; exits.

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (xml libxml2))

(xml-check-version LIBXML_VERSION)
(xml-cleanup-parser)
(exit)
@end example

@c page
@node constants
@chapter Constant values


The following bindings are exported by the @library{xml libxml2 sizeof}
library and reexported by the @library{xml libxml2} library.


@defvr Constant XML_C14N_1_0
@defvrx Constant XML_C14N_EXCLUSIVE_1_0
@defvrx Constant XML_C14N_1_1
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_CATALOGS_NAMESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_CATALOG_PI
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_CATA_PREFER_NONE
@defvrx Constant XML_CATA_PREFER_PUBLIC
@defvrx Constant XML_CATA_PREFER_SYSTEM
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_CATA_ALLOW_NONE
@defvrx Constant XML_CATA_ALLOW_GLOBAL
@defvrx Constant XML_CATA_ALLOW_DOCUMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_CATA_ALLOW_ALL
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_NONE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_UTF8
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_UTF16LE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_UTF16BE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_UCS4LE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_UCS4BE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_EBCDIC
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_UCS4_2143
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_UCS4_3412
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_UCS2
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_8859_1
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_8859_2
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_8859_3
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_8859_4
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_8859_5
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_8859_6
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_8859_7
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_8859_8
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_8859_9
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_2022_JP
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_SHIFT_JIS
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_EUC_JP
@defvrx Constant XML_CHAR_ENCODING_ASCII
Constants.
@end defvr

@defvr Constant XML_INTERNAL_GENERAL_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_EXTERNAL_GENERAL_PARSED_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_EXTERNAL_GENERAL_UNPARSED_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_INTERNAL_PARAMETER_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_EXTERNAL_PARAMETER_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_INTERNAL_PREDEFINED_ENTITY
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant HTML_TEXT_NODE
@defvrx Constant HTML_ENTITY_REF_NODE
@defvrx Constant HTML_COMMENT_NODE
@defvrx Constant HTML_PRESERVE_NODE
@defvrx Constant HTML_PI_NODE
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant HTML_PARSE_RECOVER
@defvrx Constant HTML_PARSE_NOERROR
@defvrx Constant HTML_PARSE_NOWARNING
@defvrx Constant HTML_PARSE_PEDANTIC
@defvrx Constant HTML_PARSE_NOBLANKS
@defvrx Constant HTML_PARSE_NONET
@defvrx Constant HTML_PARSE_COMPACT
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant HTML_NA
@defvrx Constant HTML_INVALID
@defvrx Constant HTML_DEPRECATED
@defvrx Constant HTML_VALID
@defvrx Constant HTML_REQUIRED
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_DEFAULT_VERSION
Constant.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_PARSER_EOF
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_START
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_MISC
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_PI
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_DTD
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_PROLOG
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_COMMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_START_TAG
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_CDATA_SECTION
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_END_TAG
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_ENTITY_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_ENTITY_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_ATTRIBUTE_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_SYSTEM_LITERAL
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_EPILOG
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_IGNORE
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_PUBLIC_LITERAL
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_DETECT_IDS
@defvrx Constant XML_COMPLETE_ATTRS
@defvrx Constant XML_SKIP_IDS
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_PARSE_UNKNOWN
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_DOM
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_SAX
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_PUSH_DOM
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_PUSH_SAX
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_READER
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SAX2_MAGIC
Constant.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_PARSE_RECOVER
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NOENT
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_DTDLOAD
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_DTDATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_DTDVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NOERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NOWARNING
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_PEDANTIC
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NOBLANKS
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_SAX1
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_XINCLUDE
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NONET
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NODICT
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NSCLEAN
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NOCDATA
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NOXINCNODE
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_COMPACT
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_OLD10
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_NOBASEFIX
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_HUGE
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSE_OLDSAX
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_WITH_THREAD
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_TREE
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_OUTPUT
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_PUSH
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_READER
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_PATTERN
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_WRITER
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_SAX1
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_FTP
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_HTTP
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_HTML
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_LEGACY
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_C14N
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_CATALOG
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_XPATH
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_XPTR
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_XINCLUDE
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_ICONV
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_ISO8859X
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_UNICODE
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_REGEXP
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_AUTOMATA
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_EXPR
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_SCHEMAS
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_SCHEMATRON
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_MODULES
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_DEBUG
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_DEBUG_MEM
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_DEBUG_RUN
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_ZLIB
@defvrx Constant XML_WITH_NONE
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_PATTERN_DEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_PATTERN_XPATH
@defvrx Constant XML_PATTERN_XSSEL
@defvrx Constant XML_PATTERN_XSFIELD
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_RELAXNG_OK
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_MEMORY
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_TYPEVAL
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_DUPID
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_TYPECMP
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_NOSTATE
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_NODEFINE
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_LISTEXTRA
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_LISTEMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_INTERNODATA
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_INTERSEQ
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_INTEREXTRA
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ELEMNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ATTRNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ELEMNONS
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ATTRNONS
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ELEMWRONGNS
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ATTRWRONGNS
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ELEMEXTRANS
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ATTREXTRANS
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ELEMNOTEMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_NOELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_NOTELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ATTRVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_CONTENTVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_EXTRACONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_INVALIDATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_DATAELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_VALELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_LISTELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_DATATYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_LIST
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_NOGRAMMAR
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_EXTRADATA
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_LACKDATA
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_INTERNAL
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_ELEMWRONG
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNG_ERR_TEXTWRONG
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_RELAXNGP_NONE
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNGP_FREE_DOC
@defvrx Constant XML_RELAXNGP_CRNG
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMATRON_OUT_QUIET
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMATRON_OUT_TEXT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMATRON_OUT_XML
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMATRON_OUT_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMATRON_OUT_FILE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMATRON_OUT_BUFFER
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMATRON_OUT_IO
Constants.
@end defvr


@c BASE_BUFFER_SIZE

@defvr Constant XML_BUFFER_ALLOC_DOUBLEIT
@defvrx Constant XML_BUFFER_ALLOC_EXACT
@defvrx Constant XML_BUFFER_ALLOC_IMMUTABLE
@defvrx Constant XML_BUFFER_ALLOC_IO
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_XML_NAMESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_XML_ID
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_ELEMENT_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_TEXT_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_CDATA_SECTION_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_ENTITY_REF_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_ENTITY_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_PI_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_COMMENT_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_DOCUMENT_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_DOCUMENT_TYPE_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_DOCUMENT_FRAG_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_NOTATION_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_HTML_DOCUMENT_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_ENTITY_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_NAMESPACE_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_START
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_END
@defvrx Constant XML_DOCB_DOCUMENT_NODE
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_CDATA
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_ID
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_IDREF
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_IDREFS
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_ENTITIES
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_NMTOKEN
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_NMTOKENS
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_ENUMERATION
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_NOTATION
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_NONE
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_IMPLIED
@defvrx Constant XML_ATTRIBUTE_FIXED
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_ELEMENT_CONTENT_PCDATA
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_CONTENT_ELEMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_CONTENT_SEQ
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_CONTENT_OR
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_ELEMENT_CONTENT_ONCE
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_CONTENT_OP
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_CONTENT_MULT
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_CONTENT_PLUS
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_ELEMENT_TYPE_UNDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_TYPE_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_TYPE_ANY
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_TYPE_MIXED
@defvrx Constant XML_ELEMENT_TYPE_ELEMENT
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_LOCAL_NAMESPACE
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_DOC_WELLFORMED
@defvrx Constant XML_DOC_NSVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_DOC_OLD10
@defvrx Constant XML_DOC_DTDVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_DOC_XINCLUDE
@defvrx Constant XML_DOC_USERBUILT
@defvrx Constant XML_DOC_INTERNAL
@defvrx Constant XML_DOC_HTML
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_CTXT_FINISH_DTD_0
@defvrx Constant XML_CTXT_FINISH_DTD_1
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XINCLUDE_NS
@defvrx Constant XINCLUDE_OLD_NS
@defvrx Constant XINCLUDE_NODE
@defvrx Constant XINCLUDE_FALLBACK
@defvrx Constant XINCLUDE_HREF
@defvrx Constant XINCLUDE_PARSE
@defvrx Constant XINCLUDE_PARSE_XML
@defvrx Constant XINCLUDE_PARSE_TEXT
@defvrx Constant XINCLUDE_PARSE_ENCODING
@defvrx Constant XINCLUDE_PARSE_XPOINTER
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_ERR_NONE
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_WARNING
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_FATAL
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_FROM_NONE
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_PARSER
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_TREE
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_NAMESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_DTD
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_HTML
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_MEMORY
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_OUTPUT
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_IO
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_FTP
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_HTTP
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_XINCLUDE
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_XPATH
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_XPOINTER
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_REGEXP
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_DATATYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_SCHEMASP
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_SCHEMASV
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_RELAXNGP
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_RELAXNGV
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_CATALOG
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_C14N
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_XSLT
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_CHECK
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_WRITER
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_MODULE
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_I18N
@defvrx Constant XML_FROM_SCHEMATRONV
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_ERR_OK
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_INTERNAL_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NO_MEMORY
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_DOCUMENT_START
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_DOCUMENT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_DOCUMENT_END
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_INVALID_HEX_CHARREF
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_INVALID_DEC_CHARREF
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_INVALID_CHARREF
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_INVALID_CHAR
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_CHARREF_AT_EOF
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_CHARREF_IN_PROLOG
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_CHARREF_IN_EPILOG
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_CHARREF_IN_DTD
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITYREF_AT_EOF
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITYREF_IN_PROLOG
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITYREF_IN_EPILOG
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITYREF_IN_DTD
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PEREF_AT_EOF
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PEREF_IN_PROLOG
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PEREF_IN_EPILOG
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PEREF_IN_INT_SUBSET
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITYREF_NO_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITYREF_SEMICOL_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PEREF_NO_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PEREF_SEMICOL_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_UNDECLARED_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_WAR_UNDECLARED_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_UNPARSED_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITY_IS_EXTERNAL
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITY_IS_PARAMETER
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_UNKNOWN_ENCODING
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_UNSUPPORTED_ENCODING
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_STRING_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_STRING_NOT_CLOSED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NS_DECL_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITY_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITY_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_LT_IN_ATTRIBUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ATTRIBUTE_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ATTRIBUTE_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ATTRIBUTE_WITHOUT_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ATTRIBUTE_REDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_LITERAL_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_LITERAL_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_COMMENT_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PI_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PI_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NOTATION_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NOTATION_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ATTLIST_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ATTLIST_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_MIXED_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_MIXED_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ELEMCONTENT_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ELEMCONTENT_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_XMLDECL_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_XMLDECL_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_CONDSEC_NOT_STARTED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_CONDSEC_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_EXT_SUBSET_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_DOCTYPE_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_MISPLACED_CDATA_END
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_CDATA_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_RESERVED_XML_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_SPACE_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_SEPARATOR_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NMTOKEN_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NAME_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PCDATA_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_URI_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_PUBID_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_LT_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_GT_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_LTSLASH_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_EQUAL_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_TAG_NAME_MISMATCH
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_TAG_NOT_FINISHED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_STANDALONE_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENCODING_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_HYPHEN_IN_COMMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_INVALID_ENCODING
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_EXT_ENTITY_STANDALONE
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_CONDSEC_INVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_VALUE_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NOT_WELL_BALANCED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_EXTRA_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITY_CHAR_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITY_PE_INTERNAL
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITY_LOOP
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITY_BOUNDARY
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_INVALID_URI
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_URI_FRAGMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_WAR_CATALOG_PI
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NO_DTD
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_CONDSEC_INVALID_KEYWORD
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_VERSION_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_WAR_UNKNOWN_VERSION
@defvrx Constant XML_WAR_LANG_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_WAR_NS_URI
@defvrx Constant XML_WAR_NS_URI_RELATIVE
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_MISSING_ENCODING
@defvrx Constant XML_WAR_SPACE_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NOT_STANDALONE
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_ENTITY_PROCESSING
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_NOTATION_PROCESSING
@defvrx Constant XML_WAR_NS_COLUMN
@defvrx Constant XML_WAR_ENTITY_REDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_UNKNOWN_VERSION
@defvrx Constant XML_ERR_VERSION_MISMATCH
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_NS_ERR_XML_NAMESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_NS_ERR_UNDEFINED_NAMESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_NS_ERR_QNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_NS_ERR_ATTRIBUTE_REDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_NS_ERR_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_NS_ERR_COLON
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_DTD_ATTRIBUTE_DEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ATTRIBUTE_REDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ATTRIBUTE_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_CONTENT_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_CONTENT_MODEL
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_CONTENT_NOT_DETERMINIST
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_DIFFERENT_PREFIX
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ELEM_DEFAULT_NAMESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ELEM_NAMESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ELEM_REDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_EMPTY_NOTATION
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ENTITY_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ID_FIXED
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ID_REDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ID_SUBSET
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_INVALID_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_INVALID_DEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_LOAD_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_MISSING_ATTRIBUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_MIXED_CORRUPT
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_MULTIPLE_ID
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NO_DOC
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NO_DTD
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NO_ELEM_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NO_PREFIX
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NO_ROOT
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NOTATION_REDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NOTATION_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NOT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NOT_PCDATA
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_NOT_STANDALONE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_ROOT_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_STANDALONE_WHITE_SPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_UNKNOWN_ATTRIBUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_UNKNOWN_ELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_UNKNOWN_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_UNKNOWN_ID
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_UNKNOWN_NOTATION
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_STANDALONE_DEFAULTED
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_XMLID_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_XMLID_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_DTD_DUP_TOKEN
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_HTML_STRUCURE_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_HTML_UNKNOWN_TAG
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_RNGP_ANYNAME_ATTR_ANCESTOR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ATTR_CONFLICT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ATTRIBUTE_CHILDREN
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ATTRIBUTE_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ATTRIBUTE_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ATTRIBUTE_NOOP
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_CHOICE_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_CHOICE_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_CREATE_FAILURE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_DATA_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_DEF_CHOICE_AND_INTERLEAVE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_DEFINE_CREATE_FAILED
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_DEFINE_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_DEFINE_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_DEFINE_NAME_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ELEM_CONTENT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ELEM_CONTENT_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ELEMENT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ELEMENT_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ELEMENT_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ELEMENT_NO_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ELEM_TEXT_CONFLICT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EMPTY_CONSTRUCT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EMPTY_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EMPTY_NOT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_ERROR_TYPE_LIB
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EXCEPT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EXCEPT_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EXCEPT_MULTIPLE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EXCEPT_NO_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EXTERNALREF_EMTPY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EXTERNAL_REF_FAILURE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_EXTERNALREF_RECURSE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_FORBIDDEN_ATTRIBUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_FOREIGN_ELEMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_GRAMMAR_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_GRAMMAR_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_GRAMMAR_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_GRAMMAR_NO_START
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_GROUP_ATTR_CONFLICT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_HREF_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INCLUDE_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INCLUDE_FAILURE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INCLUDE_RECURSE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INTERLEAVE_ADD
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INTERLEAVE_CREATE_FAILED
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INTERLEAVE_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INTERLEAVE_NO_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INVALID_DEFINE_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INVALID_URI
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_INVALID_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_MISSING_HREF
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_NAME_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_NEED_COMBINE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_NOTALLOWED_NOT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_NSNAME_ATTR_ANCESTOR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_NSNAME_NO_NS
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PARAM_FORBIDDEN
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PARAM_NAME_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PARENTREF_CREATE_FAILED
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PARENTREF_NAME_INVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PARENTREF_NO_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PARENTREF_NO_PARENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PARENTREF_NOT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PARSE_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_ANYNAME_EXCEPT_ANYNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_ATTR_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_ATTR_ELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_DATA_EXCEPT_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_DATA_EXCEPT_ELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_DATA_EXCEPT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_DATA_EXCEPT_GROUP
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_DATA_EXCEPT_INTERLEAVE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_DATA_EXCEPT_LIST
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_DATA_EXCEPT_ONEMORE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_DATA_EXCEPT_REF
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_DATA_EXCEPT_TEXT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_LIST_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_LIST_ELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_LIST_INTERLEAVE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_LIST_LIST
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_LIST_REF
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_LIST_TEXT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_NSNAME_EXCEPT_ANYNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_NSNAME_EXCEPT_NSNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_ONEMORE_GROUP_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_ONEMORE_INTERLEAVE_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_START_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_START_DATA
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_START_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_START_GROUP
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_START_INTERLEAVE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_START_LIST
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_START_ONEMORE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_START_TEXT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PAT_START_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_PREFIX_UNDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_REF_CREATE_FAILED
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_REF_CYCLE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_REF_NAME_INVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_REF_NO_DEF
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_REF_NO_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_REF_NOT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_START_CHOICE_AND_INTERLEAVE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_START_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_START_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_START_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_TEXT_EXPECTED
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_TEXT_HAS_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_TYPE_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_TYPE_NOT_FOUND
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_TYPE_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_UNKNOWN_ATTRIBUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_UNKNOWN_COMBINE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_UNKNOWN_CONSTRUCT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_UNKNOWN_TYPE_LIB
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_URI_FRAGMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_URI_NOT_ABSOLUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_VALUE_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_VALUE_NO_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_XMLNS_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_RNGP_XML_NS
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_XPATH_EXPRESSION_OK
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_NUMBER_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_UNFINISHED_LITERAL_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_START_LITERAL_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_VARIABLE_REF_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_UNDEF_VARIABLE_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_INVALID_PREDICATE_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_EXPR_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_UNCLOSED_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_UNKNOWN_FUNC_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_INVALID_OPERAND
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_INVALID_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_INVALID_ARITY
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_INVALID_CTXT_SIZE
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_INVALID_CTXT_POSITION
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_MEMORY_ERROR
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_XPTR_SYNTAX_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPTR_RESOURCE_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPTR_SUB_RESOURCE_ERROR
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_XPATH_UNDEF_PREFIX_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_ENCODING_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_INVALID_CHAR_ERROR
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_TREE_INVALID_HEX
@defvrx Constant XML_TREE_INVALID_DEC
@defvrx Constant XML_TREE_UNTERMINATED_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_TREE_NOT_UTF8
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SAVE_NOT_UTF8
@defvrx Constant XML_SAVE_CHAR_INVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SAVE_NO_DOCTYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SAVE_UNKNOWN_ENCODING
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_REGEXP_COMPILE_ERROR
Constant.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_IO_UNKNOWN
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EACCES
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EAGAIN
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EBADF
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EBADMSG
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EBUSY
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ECANCELED
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ECHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EDEADLK
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EDOM
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EEXIST
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EFBIG
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EINPROGRESS
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EINTR
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EINVAL
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EIO
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EISDIR
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EMFILE
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EMLINK
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EMSGSIZE
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENAMETOOLONG
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENFILE
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENODEV
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOENT
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOEXEC
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOLCK
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOMEM
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOSPC
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOSYS
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOTDIR
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOTEMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOTSUP
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOTTY
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENXIO
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EPERM
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EPIPE
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ERANGE
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EROFS
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ESPIPE
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ESRCH
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ETIMEDOUT
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EXDEV
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_NETWORK_ATTEMPT
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENCODER
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_FLUSH
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_WRITE
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_NO_INPUT
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_BUFFER_FULL
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_LOAD_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENOTSOCK
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EISCONN
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ECONNREFUSED
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_ENETUNREACH
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EADDRINUSE
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EALREADY
@defvrx Constant XML_IO_EAFNOSUPPORT
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_XINCLUDE_RECURSION
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_PARSE_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_ENTITY_DEF_MISMATCH
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_NO_HREF
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_NO_FALLBACK
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_HREF_URI
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_TEXT_FRAGMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_TEXT_DOCUMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_INVALID_CHAR
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_BUILD_FAILED
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_UNKNOWN_ENCODING
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_MULTIPLE_ROOT
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_XPTR_FAILED
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_XPTR_RESULT
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_INCLUDE_IN_INCLUDE
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_FALLBACKS_IN_INCLUDE
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_FALLBACK_NOT_IN_INCLUDE
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_DEPRECATED_NS
@defvrx Constant XML_XINCLUDE_FRAGMENT_ID
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_CATALOG_MISSING_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_CATALOG_ENTRY_BROKEN
@defvrx Constant XML_CATALOG_PREFER_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_CATALOG_NOT_CATALOG
@defvrx Constant XML_CATALOG_RECURSION
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMAP_PREFIX_UNDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_ATTRFORMDEFAULT_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_ATTRGRP_NONAME_NOREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_ATTR_NONAME_NOREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COMPLEXTYPE_NONAME_NOREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_ELEMFORMDEFAULT_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_ELEM_NONAME_NOREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_EXTENSION_NO_BASE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_FACET_NO_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_FAILED_BUILD_IMPORT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_GROUP_NONAME_NOREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_IMPORT_NAMESPACE_NOT_URI
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_IMPORT_REDEFINE_NSNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_IMPORT_SCHEMA_NOT_URI
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_BOOLEAN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_ENUM
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_FACET
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_FACET_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_MAXOCCURS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_MINOCCURS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_REF_AND_SUBTYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_WHITE_SPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_NOATTR_NOREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_NOTATION_NO_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_NOTYPE_NOREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_REF_AND_SUBTYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_RESTRICTION_NONAME_NOREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SIMPLETYPE_NONAME
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_TYPE_AND_SUBTYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_ALL_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_ANYATTRIBUTE_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_ATTR_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_ATTRGRP_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_ATTRIBUTE_GROUP
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_BASE_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_CHOICE_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_COMPLEXCONTENT_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_COMPLEXTYPE_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_ELEM_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_EXTENSION_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_FACET_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_FACET_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_GROUP_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_IMPORT_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_LIST_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_NOTATION_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_PROCESSCONTENT_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_REF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_RESTRICTION_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_SCHEMAS_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_SEQUENCE_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_SIMPLECONTENT_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_SIMPLETYPE_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_UNION_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_ELEM_DEFAULT_FIXED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_REGEXP_INVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_FAILED_LOAD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_NOTHING_TO_PARSE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_NOROOT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_REDEFINED_GROUP
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_REDEFINED_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_REDEFINED_ELEMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_REDEFINED_ATTRGROUP
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_REDEFINED_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_REDEFINED_NOTATION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_FAILED_PARSE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_PREFIX
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DEF_AND_PREFIX
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_INCLUDE_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INCLUDE_SCHEMA_NOT_URI
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INCLUDE_SCHEMA_NO_URI
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_NOT_SCHEMA
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNKNOWN_MEMBER_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_ATTR_USE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_RECURSIVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SUPERNUMEROUS_LIST_ITEM_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_ATTR_COMBINATION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_ATTR_INLINE_COMBINATION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_MISSING_SIMPLETYPE_CHILD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INVALID_ATTR_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_REF_AND_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_CT_PROPS_CORRECT_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_CT_PROPS_CORRECT_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_CT_PROPS_CORRECT_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_CT_PROPS_CORRECT_4
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_CT_PROPS_CORRECT_5
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DERIVATION_OK_RESTRICTION_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DERIVATION_OK_RESTRICTION_2_1_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DERIVATION_OK_RESTRICTION_2_1_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DERIVATION_OK_RESTRICTION_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DERIVATION_OK_RESTRICTION_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_WILDCARD_INVALID_NS_MEMBER
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INTERSECTION_NOT_EXPRESSIBLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_UNION_NOT_EXPRESSIBLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_IMPORT_3_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_IMPORT_3_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DERIVATION_OK_RESTRICTION_4_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DERIVATION_OK_RESTRICTION_4_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DERIVATION_OK_RESTRICTION_4_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_CT_EXTENDS_1_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_NOROOT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_UNDECLAREDELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_NOTTOPLEVEL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_WRONGELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_NOTYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_NOROLLBACK
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_ISABSTRACT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_NOTEMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_ELEMCONT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_HAVEDEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_NOTNILLABLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_EXTRACONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_INVALIDATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_INVALIDELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_NOTDETERMINIST
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CONSTRUCT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_INTERNAL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_NOTSIMPLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_ATTRUNKNOWN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_ATTRINVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_FACET
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_DATATYPE_VALID_1_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_DATATYPE_VALID_1_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_DATATYPE_VALID_1_2_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_TYPE_3_1_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_TYPE_3_1_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_FACET_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_LENGTH_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_MINLENGTH_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_MAXLENGTH_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_MININCLUSIVE_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_MAXINCLUSIVE_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_MINEXCLUSIVE_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_MAXEXCLUSIVE_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_TOTALDIGITS_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_FRACTIONDIGITS_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_PATTERN_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ENUMERATION_VALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_2_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_2_4
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_3_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_3_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_3_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_4_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_4_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_4_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_5_1_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_5_1_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_5_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_5_2_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_5_2_2_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_5_2_2_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_6
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ELT_7
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ATTRIBUTE_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ATTRIBUTE_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ATTRIBUTE_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_ATTRIBUTE_4
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_3_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_3_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_3_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_4
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_5_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_5_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_ELEMENT_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_DOCUMENT_ELEMENT_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_COMPLEX_TYPE_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_AU
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_TYPE_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_TYPE_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_IDC
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_CVC_WILDCARD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAV_MISC
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_XPTR_UNKNOWN_SCHEME
@defvrx Constant XML_XPTR_CHILDSEQ_START
@defvrx Constant XML_XPTR_EVAL_FAILED
@defvrx Constant XML_XPTR_EXTRA_OBJECTS
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_C14N_CREATE_CTXT
@defvrx Constant XML_C14N_REQUIRES_UTF8
@defvrx Constant XML_C14N_CREATE_STACK
@defvrx Constant XML_C14N_INVALID_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_C14N_UNKNOW_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_C14N_RELATIVE_NAMESPACE
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_FTP_PASV_ANSWER
@defvrx Constant XML_FTP_EPSV_ANSWER
@defvrx Constant XML_FTP_ACCNT
@defvrx Constant XML_FTP_URL_SYNTAX
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_HTTP_URL_SYNTAX
@defvrx Constant XML_HTTP_USE_IP
@defvrx Constant XML_HTTP_UNKNOWN_HOST
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_SIMPLE_TYPE_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_SIMPLE_TYPE_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_SIMPLE_TYPE_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_SIMPLE_TYPE_4
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_RESOLVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_RESTRICTION_BASE_OR_SIMPLETYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_LIST_ITEMTYPE_OR_SIMPLETYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_UNION_MEMBERTYPES_OR_SIMPLETYPES
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_ST_PROPS_CORRECT_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_ST_PROPS_CORRECT_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_ST_PROPS_CORRECT_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_1_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_1_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_1_3_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_1_3_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_2_3_1_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_2_3_1_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_2_3_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_2_3_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_2_3_2_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_2_3_2_4
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_2_3_2_5
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_3_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_3_3_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_3_3_1_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_3_3_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_3_3_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_3_3_2_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_3_3_2_4
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_RESTRICTS_3_3_2_5
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_DERIVED_OK_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ST_DERIVED_OK_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_S4S_ELEM_NOT_ALLOWED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_S4S_ELEM_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_S4S_ATTR_NOT_ALLOWED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_S4S_ATTR_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_S4S_ATTR_INVALID_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ELEMENT_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ELEMENT_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ELEMENT_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ELEMENT_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_P_PROPS_CORRECT_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_P_PROPS_CORRECT_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_P_PROPS_CORRECT_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_E_PROPS_CORRECT_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_E_PROPS_CORRECT_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_E_PROPS_CORRECT_4
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_E_PROPS_CORRECT_5
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_E_PROPS_CORRECT_6
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_INCLUDE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ATTRIBUTE_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ATTRIBUTE_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ATTRIBUTE_3_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ATTRIBUTE_3_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ATTRIBUTE_4
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_NO_XMLNS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_NO_XSI
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_VALID_DEFAULT_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_VALID_DEFAULT_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_VALID_DEFAULT_2_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_VALID_DEFAULT_2_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_CVC_SIMPLE_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_CT_EXTENDS_1_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_IMPORT_1_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_IMPORT_1_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_IMPORT_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_IMPORT_2_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_IMPORT_2_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_INTERNAL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_NOT_DETERMINISTIC
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ATTRIBUTE_GROUP_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ATTRIBUTE_GROUP_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_ATTRIBUTE_GROUP_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_MG_PROPS_CORRECT_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_MG_PROPS_CORRECT_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_CT_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_DERIVATION_OK_RESTRICTION_2_1_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_AU_PROPS_CORRECT_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_A_PROPS_CORRECT_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_C_PROPS_CORRECT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_REDEFINE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_SRC_IMPORT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_WARN_SKIP_SCHEMA
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_WARN_UNLOCATED_SCHEMA
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_WARN_ATTR_REDECL_PROH
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_WARN_ATTR_POINTLESS_PROH
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_AG_PROPS_CORRECT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_CT_EXTENDS_1_2
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_AU_PROPS_CORRECT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_A_PROPS_CORRECT_3
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAP_COS_ALL_LIMITED
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMATRONV_ASSERT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMATRONV_REPORT
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_MODULE_OPEN
@defvrx Constant XML_MODULE_CLOSE
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_ELEMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_ATTRIBUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_TEXT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_CDATA
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_ENTITYREF
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_PI
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_COMMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_DOCTYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_FRAGMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_FOUND_NOTATION
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_UNKNOWN_NODE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_ENTITY_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NO_PARENT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NO_DOC
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NO_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NO_ELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_WRONG_DOC
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NO_PREV
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_WRONG_PREV
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NO_NEXT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_WRONG_NEXT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NOT_DTD
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NOT_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NOT_ATTR_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NOT_ELEM_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NOT_ENTITY_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NOT_NS_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NO_HREF
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_WRONG_PARENT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NS_SCOPE
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NS_ANCESTOR
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NOT_UTF8
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NO_DICT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NOT_NCNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_OUTSIDE_DICT
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_WRONG_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_NAME_NOT_NULL
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_I18N_NO_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_I18N_NO_HANDLER
@defvrx Constant XML_I18N_EXCESS_HANDLER
@defvrx Constant XML_I18N_CONV_FAILED
@defvrx Constant XML_I18N_NO_OUTPUT
Constants.
@end defvr


@c @defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_
@c @defvrx Constant XML_CHECK_X

@defvr Constant XML_MODULE_LAZY
@defvrx Constant XML_MODULE_LOCAL
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_PARSER_SEVERITY_VALIDITY_WARNING
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_SEVERITY_VALIDITY_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_SEVERITY_WARNING
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_SEVERITY_ERROR
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_TEXTREADER_MODE_INITIAL
@defvrx Constant XML_TEXTREADER_MODE_INTERACTIVE
@defvrx Constant XML_TEXTREADER_MODE_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XML_TEXTREADER_MODE_EOF
@defvrx Constant XML_TEXTREADER_MODE_CLOSED
@defvrx Constant XML_TEXTREADER_MODE_READING
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_PARSER_LOADDTD
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_DEFAULTATTRS
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_VALIDATE
@defvrx Constant XML_PARSER_SUBST_ENTITIES
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_READER_TYPE_NONE
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_ELEMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_ATTRIBUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_TEXT
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_CDATA
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_ENTITY_REFERENCE
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_PROCESSING_INSTRUCTION
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_COMMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_DOCUMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_DOCUMENT_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_DOCUMENT_FRAGMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_NOTATION
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_WHITESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_SIGNIFICANT_WHITESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_END_ELEMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_END_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_READER_TYPE_XML_DECLARATION
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_EXP_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_EXP_FORBID
@defvrx Constant XML_EXP_ATOM
@defvrx Constant XML_EXP_SEQ
@defvrx Constant XML_EXP_OR
@defvrx Constant XML_EXP_COUNT
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SAVE_FORMAT
@defvrx Constant XML_SAVE_NO_DECL
@defvrx Constant XML_SAVE_NO_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_SAVE_NO_XHTML
@defvrx Constant XML_SAVE_XHTML
@defvrx Constant XML_SAVE_AS_XML
@defvrx Constant XML_SAVE_AS_HTML
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMAS_UNKNOWN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_STRING
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_NORMSTRING
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_DECIMAL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TIME
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_GDAY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_GMONTH
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_GMONTHDAY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_GYEAR
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_GYEARMONTH
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_DATE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_DATETIME
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_DURATION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_FLOAT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_DOUBLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_BOOLEAN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TOKEN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_LANGUAGE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_NMTOKEN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_NMTOKENS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_NAME
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_QNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_NCNAME
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_IDREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_IDREFS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ENTITY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ENTITIES
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_NOTATION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ANYURI
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_INTEGER
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_NPINTEGER
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_NINTEGER
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_NNINTEGER
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_PINTEGER
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_INT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_UINT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_LONG
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ULONG
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_SHORT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_USHORT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_BYTE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_UBYTE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_HEXBINARY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_BASE64BINARY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ANYTYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ANYSIMPLETYPE
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_BASIC
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_ANY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_FACET
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_SIMPLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_COMPLEX
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_SEQUENCE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_CHOICE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_ALL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_SIMPLE_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_COMPLEX_CONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_UR
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_RESTRICTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_EXTENSION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_ELEMENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_ATTRIBUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_ATTRIBUTEGROUP
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_GROUP
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_NOTATION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_LIST
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_UNION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_ANY_ATTRIBUTE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_IDC_UNIQUE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_IDC_KEY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_IDC_KEYREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_PARTICLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_TYPE_ATTRIBUTE_USE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_MININCLUSIVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_MINEXCLUSIVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_MAXINCLUSIVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_MAXEXCLUSIVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_TOTALDIGITS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_FRACTIONDIGITS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_PATTERN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_ENUMERATION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_WHITESPACE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_LENGTH
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_MAXLENGTH
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_FACET_MINLENGTH
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_EXTRA_QNAMEREF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_EXTRA_ATTR_USE_PROHIB
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMA_CONTENT_UNKNOWN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_CONTENT_EMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_CONTENT_ELEMENTS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_CONTENT_MIXED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_CONTENT_SIMPLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_CONTENT_MIXED_OR_ELEMENTS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_CONTENT_BASIC
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_CONTENT_ANY
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ANYATTR_SKIP
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ANYATTR_LAX
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ANYATTR_STRICT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ANY_SKIP
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ANY_LAX
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ANY_STRICT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTR_USE_PROHIBITED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTR_USE_REQUIRED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTR_USE_OPTIONAL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTR_GLOBAL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTR_NSDEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTR_INTERNAL_RESOLVED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTR_FIXED
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMAS_WILDCARD_COMPLETE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTRGROUP_WILDCARD_BUILDED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTRGROUP_GLOBAL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTRGROUP_MARKED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTRGROUP_REDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ATTRGROUP_HAS_REFS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_MIXED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_DERIVATION_METHOD_EXTENSION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_DERIVATION_METHOD_RESTRICTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_GLOBAL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_OWNED_ATTR_WILDCARD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_VARIETY_ABSENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_VARIETY_LIST
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_VARIETY_UNION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_VARIETY_ATOMIC
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_FINAL_EXTENSION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_FINAL_RESTRICTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_FINAL_LIST
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_FINAL_UNION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_FINAL_DEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_BUILTIN_PRIMITIVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_MARKED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_BLOCK_DEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_BLOCK_EXTENSION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_BLOCK_RESTRICTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_ABSTRACT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_FACETSNEEDVALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_INTERNAL_RESOLVED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_INTERNAL_INVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_WHITESPACE_PRESERVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_WHITESPACE_REPLACE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_WHITESPACE_COLLAPSE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_HAS_FACETS
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_NORMVALUENEEDED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_FIXUP_1
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_TYPE_REDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_NILLABLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_GLOBAL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_DEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_FIXED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_ABSTRACT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_TOPLEVEL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_REF
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_NSDEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_INTERNAL_RESOLVED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_CIRCULAR
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_BLOCK_ABSENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_BLOCK_EXTENSION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_BLOCK_RESTRICTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_BLOCK_SUBSTITUTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_FINAL_ABSENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_FINAL_EXTENSION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_FINAL_RESTRICTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_SUBST_GROUP_HEAD
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ELEM_INTERNAL_CHECKED
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_FACET_UNKNOWN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_FACET_PRESERVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_FACET_REPLACE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_FACET_COLLAPSE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_QUALIF_ELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_QUALIF_ATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_FINAL_DEFAULT_EXTENSION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_FINAL_DEFAULT_RESTRICTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_FINAL_DEFAULT_LIST
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_FINAL_DEFAULT_UNION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_BLOCK_DEFAULT_EXTENSION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_BLOCK_DEFAULT_RESTRICTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_BLOCK_DEFAULT_SUBSTITUTION
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_INCLUDING_CONVERT_NS
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_OK
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_NOROOT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_UNDECLAREDELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_NOTTOPLEVEL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_MISSING
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_WRONGELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_NOTYPE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_NOROLLBACK
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_ISABSTRACT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_NOTEMPTY
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_ELEMCONT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_HAVEDEFAULT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_NOTNILLABLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_EXTRACONTENT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_INVALIDATTR
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_INVALIDELEM
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_NOTDETERMINIST
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_CONSTRUCT
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_INTERNAL
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_NOTSIMPLE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_ATTRUNKNOWN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_ATTRINVALID
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_VALUE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_FACET
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMAS_ERR_XXX
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMA_VAL_VC_I_CREATE
Constant.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_SCHEMA_WHITESPACE_UNKNOWN
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_WHITESPACE_PRESERVE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_WHITESPACE_REPLACE
@defvrx Constant XML_SCHEMA_WHITESPACE_COLLAPSE
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant LIBXML_DOTTED_VERSION
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_VERSION_STRING
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_VERSION_EXTRA
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_MODULE_EXTENSION
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_VERSION
Constants.
@end defvr


@c WITH_TRIO
@c WITHOUT_TRIO

@defvr Constant LIBXML_THREAD_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_TREE_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_OUTPUT_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_PUSH_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_READER_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_PATTERN_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_WRITER_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_SAX1_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_FTP_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_HTTP_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_VALID_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_HTML_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_LEGACY_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_C14N_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_CATALOG_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_DOCB_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_XPATH_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_XPTR_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_XINCLUDE_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_ICONV_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_ISO8859X_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_DEBUG_ENABLED
@c DEBUG_MEMORY_LOCATION
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_DEBUG_RUNTIME
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_UNICODE_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_REGEXP_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_AUTOMATA_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_EXPR_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_SCHEMAS_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_SCHEMATRON_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_MODULES_ENABLED
@defvrx Constant LIBXML_ZLIB_ENABLED
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XPATH_EXPRESSION_OK
@defvrx Constant XPATH_NUMBER_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_UNFINISHED_LITERAL_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_START_LITERAL_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_VARIABLE_REF_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_UNDEF_VARIABLE_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_INVALID_PREDICATE_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_EXPR_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_UNCLOSED_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_UNKNOWN_FUNC_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_INVALID_OPERAND
@defvrx Constant XPATH_INVALID_TYPE
@defvrx Constant XPATH_INVALID_ARITY
@defvrx Constant XPATH_INVALID_CTXT_SIZE
@defvrx Constant XPATH_INVALID_CTXT_POSITION
@defvrx Constant XPATH_MEMORY_ERROR
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XPTR_SYNTAX_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPTR_RESOURCE_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPTR_SUB_RESOURCE_ERROR
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XPATH_UNDEF_PREFIX_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_ENCODING_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_INVALID_CHAR_ERROR
@defvrx Constant XPATH_INVALID_CTXT
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XPATH_UNDEFINED
@defvrx Constant XPATH_NODESET
@defvrx Constant XPATH_BOOLEAN
@defvrx Constant XPATH_NUMBER
@defvrx Constant XPATH_STRING
@defvrx Constant XPATH_POINT
@defvrx Constant XPATH_RANGE
@defvrx Constant XPATH_LOCATIONSET
@defvrx Constant XPATH_USERS
@defvrx Constant XPATH_XSLT_TREE
Constants.
@end defvr


@defvr Constant XML_XPATH_CHECKNS
@defvrx Constant XML_XPATH_NOVAR
Constants.
@end defvr

@c page
@node structs
@chapter Accessing data structures


@menu
* structs access::              Accessors and mutators.
* structs identifiers::         Identifier syntaxes.
@end menu

@c page
@node structs access
@section Accessors and mutators


The following bindings are exported by the @library{xml libxml2 sizeof}
library and reexported by the @library{xml libxml2} library.


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlC14NMode @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlC14NMode! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlC14NMode}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlC14NMode @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlC14NMode! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlC14NMode}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlCatalogPrefer @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlCatalogPrefer! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlCatalogPrefer}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlCatalogPrefer @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlCatalogPrefer! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlCatalogPrefer}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlCatalogAllow @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlCatalogAllow! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlCatalogAllow}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlCatalogAllow @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlCatalogAllow! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlCatalogAllow}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlChSRange-low-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChSRange-low-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChSRange-high-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChSRange-high-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlChSRange}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlChSRange @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlChSRange}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlChLRange-low-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChLRange-low-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChLRange-high-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChLRange-high-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlChLRange}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlChLRange @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlChLRange}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlChRangeGroup-nbShortRange-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChRangeGroup-nbShortRange-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChRangeGroup-nbLongRange-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChRangeGroup-nbLongRange-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChRangeGroup-shortRange-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChRangeGroup-shortRange-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChRangeGroup-longRange-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlChRangeGroup-longRange-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlChRangeGroup}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlChRangeGroup @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlChRangeGroup}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-filename-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-filename-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-node-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-node-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-pctxt-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-pctxt-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-loaded-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-loaded-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-output-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-output-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-input-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlShellCtxt-input-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlShellCtxt}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlShellCtxt @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlShellCtxt}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlCharEncoding @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlCharEncoding! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlCharEncoding}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlCharEncoding @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlCharEncoding! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlCharEncoding}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-input-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-input-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-output-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-output-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-iconv_in-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-iconv_in-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-iconv_out-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler-iconv_out-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct
xmlCharEncodingHandler} memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlCharEncodingHandler-ref @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlCharEncodingHandler}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlEntityType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlEntityType! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlEntityType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlEntityType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlEntityType! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlEntityType}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlEntity-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-type-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-children-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-children-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-last-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-last-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-parent-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-parent-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-prev-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-prev-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-orig-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-orig-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-content-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-content-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-length-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-length-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-etype-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-etype-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-ExternalID-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-ExternalID-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-SystemID-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-SystemID-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-nexte-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-nexte-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-URI-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-URI-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-owner-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-owner-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-checked-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEntity-checked-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct _xmlEntity} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlEntity @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct _xmlEntity} memory.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-startTag-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-startTag-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-endTag-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-endTag-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-saveEndTag-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-saveEndTag-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-empty-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-empty-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-depr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-depr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-dtd-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-dtd-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-isinline-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-isinline-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-desc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-desc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-subelts-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-subelts-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-defaultsubelt-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-defaultsubelt-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-attrs_opt-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-attrs_opt-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-attrs_depr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-attrs_depr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-attrs_req-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlElemDesc-attrs_req-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct htmlElemDesc}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-htmlElemDesc-ref @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct htmlElemDesc}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-htmlEntityDesc-value-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlEntityDesc-value-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlEntityDesc-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlEntityDesc-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlEntityDesc-desc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-htmlEntityDesc-desc-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct htmlEntityDesc}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-htmlEntityDesc @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct htmlEntityDesc}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-htmlParserOption @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-htmlParserOption! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{htmlParserOption}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-htmlParserOption @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-htmlParserOption! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{htmlParserOption}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-htmlStatus @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-htmlStatus! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{htmlStatus}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-htmlStatus @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-htmlStatus! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{htmlStatus}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-buf-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-buf-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-filename-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-filename-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-directory-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-directory-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-base-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-base-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-cur-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-cur-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-end-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-end-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-length-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-length-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-line-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-line-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-col-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-col-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-consumed-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-consumed-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-free-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-free-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-encoding-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-encoding-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-version-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-version-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-standalone-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-standalone-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-id-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInput-id-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct _xmlParserInput}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserInput @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct _xmlParserInput}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-node-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-node-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-begin_pos-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-begin_pos-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-begin_line-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-begin_line-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-end_pos-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-end_pos-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-end_line-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfo-end_line-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlParserNodeInfo}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserNodeInfo-ref @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlParserNodeInfo}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfoSeq-maximum-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfoSeq-maximum-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfoSeq-length-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfoSeq-length-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfoSeq-buffer-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserNodeInfoSeq-buffer-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct
xmlParserNodeInfoSeq} memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserNodeInfoSeq @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlParserNodeInfoSeq}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlParserInputState @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlParserInputState! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlParserInputState}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserInputState @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlParserInputState! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlParserInputState}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlParserMode @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlParserMode! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlParserMode}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserMode @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlParserMode! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlParserMode}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-sax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-sax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-userData-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-userData-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-myDoc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-myDoc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-wellFormed-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-wellFormed-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-replaceEntities-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-replaceEntities-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-version-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-version-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-encoding-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-encoding-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-standalone-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-standalone-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-html-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-html-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-input-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-input-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-inputNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-inputNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-inputMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-inputMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-inputTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-inputTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-node-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-node-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodeNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodeNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodeMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodeMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodeTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodeTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-record_info-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-record_info-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-node_seq-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-errNo-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-errNo-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-hasExternalSubset-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-hasExternalSubset-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-hasPErefs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-hasPErefs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-external-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-external-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-valid-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-valid-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-validate-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-validate-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-vctxt-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-instate-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-token-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-token-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-directory-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-directory-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nameNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nameNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nameMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nameMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nameTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nameTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nbChars-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nbChars-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-checkIndex-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-checkIndex-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-keepBlanks-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-keepBlanks-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-disableSAX-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-disableSAX-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-inSubset-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-inSubset-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-intSubName-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-intSubName-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-extSubURI-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-extSubURI-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-extSubSystem-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-extSubSystem-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-space-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-space-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-spaceNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-spaceNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-spaceMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-spaceMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-spaceTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-spaceTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-depth-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-depth-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-entity-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-entity-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-charset-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-charset-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodelen-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodelen-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodemem-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nodemem-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-pedantic-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-pedantic-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-loadsubset-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-loadsubset-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-linenumbers-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-linenumbers-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-catalogs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-catalogs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-recovery-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-recovery-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-progressive-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-progressive-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-dict-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-dict-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-atts-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-atts-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-maxatts-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-maxatts-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-docdict-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-docdict-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-str_xml-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-str_xml-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-str_xmlns-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-str_xmlns-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-str_xml_ns-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-str_xml_ns-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-sax2-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-sax2-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nsNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nsNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nsMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nsMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nsTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nsTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-attallocs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-attallocs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-pushTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-pushTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-attsDefault-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-attsDefault-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-attsSpecial-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-attsSpecial-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nsWellFormed-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nsWellFormed-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-options-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-options-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-dictNames-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-dictNames-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-freeElemsNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-freeElemsNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-freeElems-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-freeElems-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-freeAttrsNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-freeAttrsNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-freeAttrs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-freeAttrs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-lastError-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-xmlParserMode-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nbentities-set! @ameta{pointer} @var{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-nbentities-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-sizeentities-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserCtxt-sizeentities-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct _xmlParserCtxt}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserCtxt @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct _xmlParserCtxt}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSAXLocator-getPublicId-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSAXLocator-getPublicId-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSAXLocator-getSystemId-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSAXLocator-getSystemId-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSAXLocator-getLineNumber-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSAXLocator-getLineNumber-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSAXLocator-getColumnNumber-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSAXLocator-getColumnNumber-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct _xmlSAXLocator}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSAXLocator @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct _xmlSAXLocator}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlParserOption @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlParserOption! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlParserOption}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserOption @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlParserOption! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlParserOption}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlFeature @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlFeature! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlFeature}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlFeature @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlFeature! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlFeature}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlPatternFlags @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlPatternFlags! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlPatternFlags}.
@end defun


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlRelaxNGValidErr @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlRelaxNGValidErr! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlRelaxNGValidErr}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlRelaxNGValidErr @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlRelaxNGValidErr! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlRelaxNGValidErr}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlRelaxNGParserFlag @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlRelaxNGParserFlag! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlRelaxNGParserFlag}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlRelaxNGParserFlag @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlRelaxNGParserFlag! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlRelaxNGParserFlag}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlSchematronValidOptions @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlSchematronValidOptions! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlSchematronValidOptions}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchematronValidOptions @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlSchematronValidOptions! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlSchematronValidOptions}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlBufferAllocationScheme @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlBufferAllocationScheme! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlBufferAllocationScheme}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlBufferAllocationScheme @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlBufferAllocationScheme! {pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlBufferAllocationScheme}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlBuffer-content-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlBuffer-content-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlBuffer-use-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlBuffer-use-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlBuffer-size-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlBuffer-size-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlBuffer-alloc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlBuffer-contentIO-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlBuffer-contentIO-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlBuffer}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlBuffer @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlBuffer}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlElementType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlElementType! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlElementType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlElementType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlElementType! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlElementType}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlNotation-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNotation-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNotation-PublicID-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNotation-PublicID-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNotation-SystemID-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNotation-SystemID-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlNotation}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlNotation @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlNotation}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlAttributeType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlAttributeType! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlAttributeType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlAttributeType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlAttributeType! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlAttributeType}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlAttributeDefault @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlAttributeDefault! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlAttributeDefault}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlAttributeDefault @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlAttributeDefault! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlAttributeDefault}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlEnumeration-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEnumeration-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEnumeration-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlEnumeration-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlEnumeration}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlEnumeration @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlEnumeration}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-type-ref @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-name-set! @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-children-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-children-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-last-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-last-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-parent-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-parent-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-prev-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-prev-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-nexth-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-nexth-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-atype-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-def-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-defaultValue-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-defaultValue-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-tree-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-tree-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-prefix-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-prefix-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-elem-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttribute-elem-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlAttribute}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlAttribute @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlAttribute}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlElementContentType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlElementContentType! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlElementContentType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlElementContentType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlElementContentType! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlElementContentType}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlElementContentOccur @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlElementContentOccur! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlElementContentOccur}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlElementContentOccur @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlElementContentOccur! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlElementContentOccur}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-ocur-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-c1-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-c1-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-c2-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-c2-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-parent-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-parent-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-prefix-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElementContent-prefix-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlElementContent}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlElementContent @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlElementContent}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlElementTypeVal @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlElementTypeVal! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlElementTypeVal}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlElementTypeVal @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlElementTypeVal! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlElementTypeVal}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlElement-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-children-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-children-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-last-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-last-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-parent-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-parent-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-prev-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-prev-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-etype-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-content-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-content-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-attributes-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-attributes-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-prefix-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-prefix-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-contModel-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlElement-contModel-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlElement}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlElement @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlElement}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlNs-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-href-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-href-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-prefix-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-prefix-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-context-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNs-context-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlNs}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlNs @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlNs}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlDtd-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-children-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-children-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-last-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-last-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-parent-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-parent-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-prev-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-prev-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-notations-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-notations-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-elements-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-elements-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-attributes-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-attributes-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-entities-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-entities-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-ExternalID-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-ExternalID-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-SystemID-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-SystemID-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-pentities-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDtd-pentities-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlDtd} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlDtd @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlDtd} memory.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlAttr-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-children-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-children-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-last-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-last-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-parent-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-parent-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-prev-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-prev-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-ns-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-ns-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-atype-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-psvi-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlAttr-psvi-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlAttr} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlAttr @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlAttr} memory.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlID-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-value-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-value-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-attr-ref @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-name-set! @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-name-ref @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-lineno-set! @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-lineno-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlID-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlID} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlID @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlID} memory.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlRef-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlRef-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlRef-value-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlRef-value-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlRef-attr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlRef-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlRef-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlRef-lineno-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlRef-lineno-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlRef} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlRef @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlRef} memory.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlNode-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-children-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-children-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-last-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-last-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-parent-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-parent-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-prev-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-prev-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-ns-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-ns-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-content-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-content-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-properties-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-properties-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-nsDef-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-nsDef-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-psvi-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-psvi-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-line-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-line-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-extra-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNode-extra-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlNode} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlNode @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlNode} memory.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlDocProperties @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlDocProperties! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlDocProperties}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlDocProperties @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlDocProperties! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlDocProperties}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlDoc-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-children-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-children-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-last-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-last-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-parent-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-parent-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-prev-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-prev-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-compression-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-compression-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-standalone-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-standalone-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-intSubset-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-intSubset-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-extSubset-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-extSubset-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-oldNs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-oldNs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-version-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-version-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-encoding-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-encoding-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-ids-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-ids-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-refs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-refs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-URL-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-URL-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-charset-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-charset-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-dict-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-dict-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-psvi-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-psvi-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-parseFlags-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-parseFlags-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-properties-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDoc-properties-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlDoc} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlDoc @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlDoc} memory.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlDOMWrapCtxt-_private-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDOMWrapCtxt-_private-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDOMWrapCtxt-type-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDOMWrapCtxt-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDOMWrapCtxt-namespaceMap-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDOMWrapCtxt-namespaceMap-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDOMWrapCtxt-getNsForNodeFunc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlDOMWrapCtxt-getNsForNodeFunc-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlDOMWrapCtxt}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlDOMWrapCtxt @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlDOMWrapCtxt}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlURI-scheme-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-scheme-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-opaque-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-opaque-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-authority-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-authority-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-server-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-server-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-user-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-user-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-port-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-port-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-path-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-path-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-query-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-query-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-fragment-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-fragment-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-cleanup-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-cleanup-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-query_raw-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlURI-query_raw-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlURI} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlURI-ref @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlURI} memory.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-userData-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-userData-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-error-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-error-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-warning-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-warning-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-node-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-node-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-nodeNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-nodeNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-nodeMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-nodeMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-nodeTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-nodeTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-finishDtd-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-finishDtd-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-valid-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-valid-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-vstate-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-vstate-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-vstateNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-vstateNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-vstateMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-vstateMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-vstateTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-vstateTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-am-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-am-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-state-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlValidCtxt-state-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlValidCtxt}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlValidCtxt @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlValidCtxt}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlErrorLevel @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlErrorLevel! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlErrorLevel}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlErrorLevel @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlErrorLevel! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlErrorLevel}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlErrorDomain @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlErrorDomain! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlErrorDomain}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlErrorDomain @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlErrorDomain! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlErrorDomain}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlError-domain-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-domain-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-code-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-code-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-message-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-message-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-level-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-level-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-file-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-file-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-line-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-line-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-str1-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-str1-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-str2-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-str2-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-str3-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-str3-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-int1-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-int1-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-int2-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-int2-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-ctxt-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-ctxt-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-node-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlError-node-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlError} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlError @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlError} memory.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlParserErrors @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlParserErrors! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlParserErrors}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserErrors @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlParserErrors! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlParserErrors}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-context-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-context-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-readcallback-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-readcallback-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-closecallback-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-closecallback-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-encoder-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-encoder-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-buffer-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-buffer-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-raw-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-raw-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-compressed-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-compressed-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-error-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-error-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-rawconsumed-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlParserInputBuffer-rawconsumed-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct
_xmlParserInputBuffer} memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserInputBuffer @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlParserInputBuffer}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-context-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-context-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-writecallback-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-writecallback-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-closecallback-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-closecallback-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-encoder-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-encoder-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-buffer-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-buffer-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-conv-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-conv-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-written-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-written-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-error-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlOutputBuffer-error-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct _xmlOutputBuffer}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlOutputBuffer @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct _xmlOutputBuffer}.
@end deffn

@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlModuleOption @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlModuleOption! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlModuleOption}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlModuleOption @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlModuleOption! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlModuleOption}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlParserSeverities @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlParserSeverities! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlParserSeverities}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserSeverities @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlParserSeverities! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlParserSeverities}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlTextReaderMode @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlTextReaderMode! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlTextReaderMode}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlTextReaderMode @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlTextReaderMode! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlTextReaderMode}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlParserProperties @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlParserProperties! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlParserProperties}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlParserProperties @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlParserProperties! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlParserProperties}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlReaderTypes @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlReaderTypes! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlReaderTypes}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlReaderTypes @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlReaderTypes! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlReaderTypes}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlExpNodeType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlExpNodeType! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlExpNodeType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlExpNodeType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlExpNodeType! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlExpNodeType}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlSaveOption @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlSaveOption! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlSaveOption}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSaveOption @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlSaveOption! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlSaveOption}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlSchemaValType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlSchemaValType! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlSchemaValType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaValType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlSchemaValType! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlSchemaValType}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlSchemaTypeType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlSchemaTypeType! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlSchemaTypeType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaTypeType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlSchemaTypeType! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlSchemaTypeType}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlSchemaContentType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlSchemaContentType! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlSchemaContentType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaContentType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlSchemaContentType! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlSchemaContentType}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAnnot-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAnnot-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAnnot-content-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAnnot-content-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlSchemaAnnot}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaAnnot @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaAnnot}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-type-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-id-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-id-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-ref-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-ref-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-refNs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-refNs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-typeName-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-typeName-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-typeNs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-typeNs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-annot-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-annot-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-base-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-base-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-occurs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-occurs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-defValue-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-defValue-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-subtypes-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-subtypes-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-node-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-node-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-targetNamespace-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-targetNamespace-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-flags-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-flags-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-refPrefix-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-refPrefix-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-defVal-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-defVal-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-refDecl-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttribute-refDecl-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct
xmlSchemaAttribute} memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaAttribute @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaAttribute}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeLink-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeLink-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeLink-attr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeLink-attr-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct
xmlSchemaAttributeLink}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaAttributeLink @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaAttributeLink}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcardNs-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcardNs-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcardNs-value-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcardNs-value-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct
xmlSchemaWildcardNs} memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaWildcardNs @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaWildcardNs}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-type-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-id-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-id-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-annot-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-annot-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-xmlNodePtr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-xmlNodePtr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-minOccurs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-minOccurs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-maxOccurs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-maxOccurs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-processContents-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-processContents-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-any-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-any-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-nsSet-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-nsSet-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-negNsSet-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-negNsSet-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-flags-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaWildcard-flags-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlSchemaWildcard}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaWildcard @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaWildcard}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-type-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-id-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-id-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-ref-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-ref-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-refNs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-refNs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-annot-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-annot-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-attributes-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-attributes-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-node-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-node-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-flags-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-flags-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-attributeWildcard-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-attributeWildcard-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-refPrefix-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-refPrefix-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-refItem-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-refItem-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-targetNamespace-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-targetNamespace-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-attrUses-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup-attrUses-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct
xmlSchemaAttributeGroup} memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaAttributeGroup}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaTypeLink-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaTypeLink-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaTypeLink-type-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaTypeLink-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlSchemaTypeLink}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaTypeLink @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaTypeLink}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaFacetLink-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaFacetLink-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaFacetLink-facet-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaFacetLink-facet-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct
xmlSchemaFacetLink} memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaFacetLink @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaFacetLink}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-type-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-next-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-next-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-id-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-id-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-ref-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-ref-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-refNs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-refNs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-annot-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-annot-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-subtypes-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-subtypes-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-attributes-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-attributes-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-node-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-node-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-minOccurs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-minOccurs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-maxOccurs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-maxOccurs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-flags-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-flags-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-targetNamespace-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-targetNamespace-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-namedType-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-namedType-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-namedTypeNs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-namedTypeNs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-substGroup-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-substGroup-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-substGroupNs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-substGroupNs-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-scope-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-scope-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-value-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-value-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-refDecl-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-refDecl-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-contModel-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-contModel-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-contentType-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-contentType-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-refPrefix-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-refPrefix-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-defVal-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-defVal-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-idcs-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaElement-idcs-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlSchemaElement}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaElement @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaElement}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-type-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-annot-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-annot-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-identifier-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-identifier-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-targetNamespace-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlSchemaNotation-targetNamespace-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlSchemaNotation}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaNotation @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlSchemaNotation}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlSchemaValidError @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlSchemaValidError! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlSchemaValidError}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaValidError @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlSchemaValidError! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlSchemaValidError}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlSchemaValidOption @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlSchemaValidOption! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlSchemaValidOption}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaValidOption @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlSchemaValidOption! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlSchemaValidOption}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlSchemaWhitespaceValueType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlSchemaWhitespaceValueType! @var{pointer}
@var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlSchemaWhitespaceValueType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlSchemaWhitespaceValueType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlSchemaWhitespaceValueType! {pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlSchemaWhitespaceValueType}.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlXPathError @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlXPathError! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlXPathError}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlXPathError @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlXPathError! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for arrays of values of type @code{xmlXPathError}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlNodeSet-nodeNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNodeSet-nodeNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNodeSet-nodeMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNodeSet-nodeMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNodeSet-nodeTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlNodeSet-nodeTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlNodeSet} memory
blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlNodeSet @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlNodeSet} memory.
@end deffn


@defun pointer-ref-c-xmlXPathObjectType @var{pointer} @var{offset}
@defunx pointer-set-c-xmlXPathObjectType! @var{pointer} @var{offset} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlXPathObjectType}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlXPathObjectType @var{pointer} @var{index}
@deffnx Syntax array-set-c-xmlXPathObjectType! @var{pointer} @var{index} @var{value}
Accessor and mutator for values of type @code{xmlXPathObjectType}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-type-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-type-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-nodesetval-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-nodesetval-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-boolval-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-boolval-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-floatval-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-floatval-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-stringval-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-stringval-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-user-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-user-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-index-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-index-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-user2-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-user2-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-index2-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathObject-index2-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlXPathObject}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlXPathObject @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlXPathObject}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlXPathType-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathType-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathType-func-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathType-func-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlXPathType}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlXPathType @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlXPathType}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlXPathVariable-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathVariable-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathVariable-value-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathVariable-value-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlXPathVariable}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlXPathVariable @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlXPathVariable}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlXPathFunct-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathFunct-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathFunct-func-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathFunct-func-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlXPathFunct}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlXPathFunct @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlXPathFunct}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlXPathAxis-name-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathAxis-name-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathAxis-func-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathAxis-func-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlXPathAxis}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlXPathAxis @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlXPathAxis}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-doc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-doc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-node-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-node-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nb_variables_unused-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nb_variables_unused-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-max_variables_unused-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-max_variables_unused-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-varHash-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-varHash-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nb_types-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nb_types-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-max_types-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-max_types-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-types-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-types-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nb_funcs_unused-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nb_funcs_unused-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-max_funcs_unused-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-max_funcs_unused-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-funcHash-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-funcHash-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nb_axis-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nb_axis-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-max_axis-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-max_axis-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-axis-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-axis-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-namespaces-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-namespaces-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nsNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nsNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-user-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-user-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-contextSize-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-contextSize-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-proximityPosition-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-proximityPosition-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-xptr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-xptr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-here-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-here-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-origin-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-origin-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nsHash-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-nsHash-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-varLookupFunc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-varLookupFunc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-varLookupData-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-varLookupData-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-extra-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-extra-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-function-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-function-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-functionURI-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-functionURI-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-funcLookupFunc-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-funcLookupFunc-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-funcLookupData-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-funcLookupData-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-tmpNsList-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-tmpNsList-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-tmpNsNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-tmpNsNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-userData-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-userData-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-error-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-error-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-lastError-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-debugNode-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-debugNode-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-dict-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-dict-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-flags-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-flags-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-cache-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathContext-cache-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlXPathContext}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlXPathContext @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlXPathContext}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-cur-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-cur-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-base-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-base-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-error-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-error-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-context-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-context-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-value-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-value-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-valueNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-valueNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-valueMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-valueMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-valueTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-valueTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-comp-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-comp-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-xptr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-xptr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-ancestor-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlXPathParserContext-ancestor-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct
xmlXPathParserContext} memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlXPathParserContext @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlXPathParserContext}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax struct-xmlLocationSet-locNr-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlLocationSet-locNr-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlLocationSet-locMax-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlLocationSet-locMax-ref @ameta{pointer}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlLocationSet-locTab-set! @ameta{pointer} @ameta{value}
@deffnx Syntax struct-xmlLocationSet-locTab-ref @ameta{pointer}
Accessors and mutators for the fields of @code{struct xmlLocationSet}
memory blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax array-ref-c-xmlLocationSet @ameta{pointer} @ameta{index}
Accessors and mutators for arrays of @code{struct xmlLocationSet}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node structs identifiers
@section Identifier syntaxes


The following bindings are exported by the @library{xml libxml2 sizeof}
library and reexported by the @library{xml libxml2} library.

The syntaxes named @func{define-X}, where @samp{X} is a structure name,
use @func{define-syntax} to define a set of identifiers syntaxes which
can be used to access and mutate fields of foreign data structures.  For
example:

@example
(define-xmlNode node)
@end example

@noindent
will define one identifier syntax for each field of @code{xmlNode}:

@example
node.name  node.type node.doc  node.ns  ...
@end example

@noindent
which can be used as:

@example
(define-xmlNode node)
(display node.name)
(set! node.name ---)
@end example

@noindent
and notice that @func{define-xmlNode} is a definition.

The syntaxes named @func{with-struct-X}, where @samp{X} is a structure
name, use @func{let-syntax} to define a set of identifiers syntaxes
which can be used to access and mutate fields of foreign data
structures.  For example:

@example
(with-struct-xmlNode node
  @cmeta{body} ...)
@end example

@noindent
will define one identifier syntax for each field of @code{xmlNode}:

@example
node.name  node.type node.doc  node.ns  ...
@end example

@noindent
the @meta{body} forms are expanded in the syntactic environment obtained
by extending the syntactic environment of the @func{with-struct-xmlNode}
form with the generated identifiers.  So we can do:

@example
(with-struct-xmlNode node
  (display node.name)
  (set! node.name ---))
@end example

@noindent
and notice that @func{with-struct-xmlNode} is not a definition.


@deffn Syntax define-xmlChSRange @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlChSRange @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlChSRange}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlChLRange @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlChLRange @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlChLRange}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlChRangeGroup @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlChRangeGroup @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlChRangeGroup}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlShellCtxt @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlShellCtxt @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlShellCtxt}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlCharEncodingHandler @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlCharEncodingHandler @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlCharEncodingHandler}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlEntity @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlEntity @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlEntity}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-htmlElemDesc @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-htmlElemDesc @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{htmlElemDesc}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-htmlEntityDesc @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-htmlEntityDesc @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{htmlEntityDesc}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlParserInput @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlParserInput @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlParserInput}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlParserNodeInfo @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlParserNodeInfo @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlParserNodeInfo}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlParserNodeInfoSeq @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlParserNodeInfoSeq @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlParserNodeInfoSeq}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlParserCtxt @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlParserCtxt @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlParserCtxt}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSAXLocator @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSAXLocator @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSAXLocator}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlBuffer @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlBuffer @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlBuffer}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlNotation @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlNotation @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlNotation}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlEnumeration @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlEnumeration @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlEnumeration}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlAttribute @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlAttribute @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlAttribute}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlElementContent @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlElementContent @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlElementContent}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlElement @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlElement @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlElement}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlNs @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlNs @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlNs}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlDtd @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlDtd @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlDtd}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlAttr @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlAttr @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlAttr}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlID @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlID @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlID}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlRef @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlRef @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlRef}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlNode @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlNode @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlNode}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlDoc @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlDoc @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlDoc}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlDOMWrapCtxt @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlDOMWrapCtxt @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlDOMWrapCtxt}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlURI @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlURI @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlURI}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlValidCtxt @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlValidCtxt @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlValidCtxt}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlError @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlError @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlError}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlParserInputBuffer @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlParserInputBuffer @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlParserInputBuffer}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlOutputBuffer @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlOutputBuffer @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlOutputBuffer}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaAnnot @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaAnnot @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaAnnot}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaAttribute @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaAttribute @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaAttribute}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaAttributeLink @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaAttributeLink @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaAttributeLink}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaWildcardNs @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaWildcardNs @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaWildcardNs}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaWildcard @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaWildcard @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaWildcard}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaAttributeGroup @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaAttributeGroup}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaTypeLink @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaTypeLink @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaTypeLink}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaFacetLink @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaFacetLink @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaFacetLink}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaElement @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaElement @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaElement}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlSchemaNotation @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlSchemaNotation @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlSchemaNotation}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlNodeSet @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlNodeSet @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlNodeSet}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlXPathObject @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlXPathObject @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlXPathObject}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlXPathType @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlXPathType @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlXPathType}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlXPathVariable @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlXPathVariable @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlXPathVariable}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlXPathFunct @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlXPathFunct @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlXPathFunct}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlXPathAxis @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlXPathAxis @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlXPathAxis}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlXPathContext @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlXPathContext @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlXPathContext}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlXPathParserContext @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlXPathParserContext @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlXPathParserContext}
data structures.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-xmlLocationSet @ameta{name}
@deffnx Syntax with-struct-xmlLocationSet @ameta{name} @ameta{body0} @ameta{body} ...
Build identifier syntaxes to access the fields of @code{xmlLocationSet}
data structures.
@end deffn

@c page
@node primitives
@chapter Primitive functions


The bindings described in this chapter are exported by the @library{xml
libxml2 primitives} library and reexported by the @library{xml libxml2}
library.  Notice that variadic functions are not interfaced.


@subsubheading Canonical @axml{} and exclusive @axml{} canonicalization

@defun xml-c14n-doc-save-to
@findex xmlC14NDocSaveTo
Alias for @func{xmlC14NDocSaveTo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-c14n-doc-dump-memory
@findex xmlC14NDocDumpMemory
Alias for @func{xmlC14NDocDumpMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-c14n-doc-save
@findex xmlC14NDocSave
Alias for @func{xmlC14NDocSave}.
@end defun


@defun xml-c14n-execute
@findex xmlC14NExecute
Alias for @func{xmlC14NExecute}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Unicode character range checking

@defun xml-char-in-range
@findex xmlCharInRange
Alias for @func{xmlCharInRange}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-base-char
@findex xmlIsBaseChar
Alias for @func{xmlIsBaseChar}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-blank
@findex xmlIsBlank
Alias for @func{xmlIsBlank}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-char
@findex xmlIsChar
Alias for @func{xmlIsChar}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-combining
@findex xmlIsCombining
Alias for @func{xmlIsCombining}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-digit
@findex xmlIsDigit
Alias for @func{xmlIsDigit}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-extender
@findex xmlIsExtender
Alias for @func{xmlIsExtender}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-ideographic
@findex xmlIsIdeographic
Alias for @func{xmlIsIdeographic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-pubid-char
@findex xmlIsPubidChar
Alias for @func{xmlIsPubidChar}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-base-char-ch
@findex xmlIsBaseChar_ch
Alias for @func{xmlIsBaseChar_ch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-base-char-q
@findex xmlIsBaseCharQ
Alias for @func{xmlIsBaseCharQ}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-base-char-group
@findex xmlIsBaseCharGroup
Alias for @func{xmlIsBaseCharGroup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-blank-ch
@findex xmlIsBlank_ch
Alias for @func{xmlIsBlank_ch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-blank-q
@findex xmlIsBlankQ
Alias for @func{xmlIsBlankQ}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-char-ch
@findex xmlIsChar_ch
Alias for @func{xmlIsChar_ch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-char-q
@findex xmlIsCharQ
Alias for @func{xmlIsCharQ}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-char-group
@findex xmlIsCharGroup
Alias for @func{xmlIsCharGroup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-combining-q
@findex xmlIsCombiningQ
Alias for @func{xmlIsCombiningQ}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-combining-group
@findex xmlIsCombiningGroup
Alias for @func{xmlIsCombiningGroup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-digit-ch
@findex xmlIsDigit_ch
Alias for @func{xmlIsDigit_ch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-digit-q
@findex xmlIsDigitQ
Alias for @func{xmlIsDigitQ}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-digit-group
@findex xmlIsDigitGroup
Alias for @func{xmlIsDigitGroup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-extender-ch
@findex xmlIsExtender_ch
Alias for @func{xmlIsExtender_ch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-extender-q
@findex xmlIsExtenderQ
Alias for @func{xmlIsExtenderQ}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-extender-group
@findex xmlIsExtenderGroup
Alias for @func{xmlIsExtenderGroup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-ideographic-q
@findex xmlIsIdeographicQ
Alias for @func{xmlIsIdeographicQ}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-ideographic-group
@findex xmlIsIdeographicGroup
Alias for @func{xmlIsIdeographicGroup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-pubid-char-tab
@findex xmlIsPubidChar_tab
Alias for @func{xmlIsPubidChar_tab}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-pubid-char-ch
@findex xmlIsPubidChar_ch
Alias for @func{xmlIsPubidChar_ch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-pubid-char-q
@findex xmlIsPubidCharQ
Alias for @func{xmlIsPubidCharQ}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Interfaces to the catalog handling system

@defun xml-new-catalog
@findex xmlNewCatalog
Alias for @func{xmlNewCatalog}.
@end defun


@defun xml-load-a-catalog
@findex xmlLoadACatalog
Alias for @func{xmlLoadACatalog}.
@end defun


@defun xml-load-sgml-super-catalog
@findex xmlLoadSGMLSuperCatalog
Alias for @func{xmlLoadSGMLSuperCatalog}.
@end defun


@defun xml-convert-sgml-catalog
@findex xmlConvertSGMLCatalog
Alias for @func{xmlConvertSGMLCatalog}.
@end defun


@defun xml-a-catalog-add
@findex xmlACatalogAdd
Alias for @func{xmlACatalogAdd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-a-catalog-remove
@findex xmlACatalogRemove
Alias for @func{xmlACatalogRemove}.
@end defun


@defun xml-a-catalog-resolve
@findex xmlACatalogResolve
Alias for @func{xmlACatalogResolve}.
@end defun


@defun xml-a-catalog-resolve-system
@findex xmlACatalogResolveSystem
Alias for @func{xmlACatalogResolveSystem}.
@end defun


@defun xml-a-catalog-resolve-public
@findex xmlACatalogResolvePublic
Alias for @func{xmlACatalogResolvePublic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-a-catalog-resolve-uri
@findex xmlACatalogResolveURI
Alias for @func{xmlACatalogResolveURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-a-catalog-dump
@findex xmlACatalogDump
Alias for @func{xmlACatalogDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-catalog
@findex xmlFreeCatalog
Alias for @func{xmlFreeCatalog}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-is-empty
@findex xmlCatalogIsEmpty
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogIsEmpty}.
@end defun


@defun xml-initialize-catalog
@findex xmlInitializeCatalog
Alias for @func{xmlInitializeCatalog}.
@end defun


@defun xml-load-catalog
@findex xmlLoadCatalog
Alias for @func{xmlLoadCatalog}.
@end defun


@defun xml-load-catalogs
@findex xmlLoadCatalogs
Alias for @func{xmlLoadCatalogs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-cleanup
@findex xmlCatalogCleanup
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogCleanup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-dump
@findex xmlCatalogDump
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-resolve
@findex xmlCatalogResolve
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogResolve}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-resolve-system
@findex xmlCatalogResolveSystem
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogResolveSystem}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-resolve-public
@findex xmlCatalogResolvePublic
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogResolvePublic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-resolve-uri
@findex xmlCatalogResolveURI
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogResolveURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-add
@findex xmlCatalogAdd
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogAdd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-remove
@findex xmlCatalogRemove
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogRemove}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-catalog-file
@findex xmlParseCatalogFile
Alias for @func{xmlParseCatalogFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-convert
@findex xmlCatalogConvert
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogConvert}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-free-local
@findex xmlCatalogFreeLocal
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogFreeLocal}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-add-local
@findex xmlCatalogAddLocal
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogAddLocal}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-local-resolve
@findex xmlCatalogLocalResolve
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogLocalResolve}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-local-resolve-uri
@findex xmlCatalogLocalResolveURI
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogLocalResolveURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-set-debug
@findex xmlCatalogSetDebug
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogSetDebug}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-set-default-prefer
@findex xmlCatalogSetDefaultPrefer
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogSetDefaultPrefer}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-set-defaults
@findex xmlCatalogSetDefaults
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogSetDefaults}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-get-defaults
@findex xmlCatalogGetDefaults
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogGetDefaults}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-get-system
@findex xmlCatalogGetSystem
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogGetSystem}.
@end defun


@defun xml-catalog-get-public
@findex xmlCatalogGetPublic
Alias for @func{xmlCatalogGetPublic}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Tree debugging @api{}s

@defun xml-debug-dump-string
@findex xmlDebugDumpString
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-dump-attr
@findex xmlDebugDumpAttr
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpAttr}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-dump-attr-list
@findex xmlDebugDumpAttrList
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpAttrList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-dump-one-node
@findex xmlDebugDumpOneNode
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpOneNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-dump-node
@findex xmlDebugDumpNode
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-dump-node-list
@findex xmlDebugDumpNodeList
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpNodeList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-dump-document-head
@findex xmlDebugDumpDocumentHead
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpDocumentHead}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-dump-document
@findex xmlDebugDumpDocument
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpDocument}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-dump-dtd
@findex xmlDebugDumpDTD
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpDTD}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-dump-entities
@findex xmlDebugDumpEntities
Alias for @func{xmlDebugDumpEntities}.
@end defun


@defun xml-debug-check-document
@findex xmlDebugCheckDocument
Alias for @func{xmlDebugCheckDocument}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ls-one-node
@findex xmlLsOneNode
Alias for @func{xmlLsOneNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ls-count-node
@findex xmlLsCountNode
Alias for @func{xmlLsCountNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-bool-to-text
@findex xmlBoolToText
Alias for @func{xmlBoolToText}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-print-xpath-error
@findex xmlShellPrintXPathError
Alias for @func{xmlShellPrintXPathError}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-print-xpath-result
@findex xmlShellPrintXPathResult
Alias for @func{xmlShellPrintXPathResult}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-list
@findex xmlShellList
Alias for @func{xmlShellList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-base
@findex xmlShellBase
Alias for @func{xmlShellBase}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-dir
@findex xmlShellDir
Alias for @func{xmlShellDir}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-load
@findex xmlShellLoad
Alias for @func{xmlShellLoad}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-print-node
@findex xmlShellPrintNode
Alias for @func{xmlShellPrintNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-cat
@findex xmlShellCat
Alias for @func{xmlShellCat}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-write
@findex xmlShellWrite
Alias for @func{xmlShellWrite}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-save
@findex xmlShellSave
Alias for @func{xmlShellSave}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-validate
@findex xmlShellValidate
Alias for @func{xmlShellValidate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-du
@findex xmlShellDu
Alias for @func{xmlShellDu}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell-pwd
@findex xmlShellPwd
Alias for @func{xmlShellPwd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-shell
@findex xmlShell
Alias for @func{xmlShell}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading String dictionary

@defun xml-dict-create
@findex xmlDictCreate
Alias for @func{xmlDictCreate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dict-create-sub
@findex xmlDictCreateSub
Alias for @func{xmlDictCreateSub}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dict-reference
@findex xmlDictReference
Alias for @func{xmlDictReference}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dict-free
@findex xmlDictFree
Alias for @func{xmlDictFree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dict-lookup
@findex xmlDictLookup
Alias for @func{xmlDictLookup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dict-exists
@findex xmlDictExists
Alias for @func{xmlDictExists}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dict-qlookup
@findex xmlDictQLookup
Alias for @func{xmlDictQLookup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dict-owns
@findex xmlDictOwns
Alias for @func{xmlDictOwns}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dict-size
@findex xmlDictSize
Alias for @func{xmlDictSize}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dict-cleanup
@findex xmlDictCleanup
Alias for @func{xmlDictCleanup}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Interface for the encoding conversion functions

@defun xml-init-char-encoding-handlers
@findex xmlInitCharEncodingHandlers
Alias for @func{xmlInitCharEncodingHandlers}.
@end defun


@defun xml-cleanup-char-encoding-handlers
@findex xmlCleanupCharEncodingHandlers
Alias for @func{xmlCleanupCharEncodingHandlers}.
@end defun


@defun xml-register-char-encoding-handler
@findex xmlRegisterCharEncodingHandler
Alias for @func{xmlRegisterCharEncodingHandler}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-char-encoding-handler
@findex xmlGetCharEncodingHandler
Alias for @func{xmlGetCharEncodingHandler}.
@end defun


@defun xml-find-char-encoding-handler
@findex xmlFindCharEncodingHandler
Alias for @func{xmlFindCharEncodingHandler}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-char-encoding-handler
@findex xmlNewCharEncodingHandler
Alias for @func{xmlNewCharEncodingHandler}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-encoding-Alias
@findex xmlAddEncodingAlias
Alias for @func{xmlAddEncodingAlias}.
@end defun


@defun xml-del-encoding-Alias
@findex xmlDelEncodingAlias
Alias for @func{xmlDelEncodingAlias}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-encoding-Alias
@findex xmlGetEncodingAlias
Alias for @func{xmlGetEncodingAlias}.
@end defun


@defun xml-cleanup-encoding-Aliases
@findex xmlCleanupEncodingAliases
Alias for @func{xmlCleanupEncodingAliases}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-char-encoding
@findex xmlParseCharEncoding
Alias for @func{xmlParseCharEncoding}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-char-encoding-name
@findex xmlGetCharEncodingName
Alias for @func{xmlGetCharEncodingName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-detect-char-encoding
@findex xmlDetectCharEncoding
Alias for @func{xmlDetectCharEncoding}.
@end defun


@defun xml-char-enc-out-func
@findex xmlCharEncOutFunc
Alias for @func{xmlCharEncOutFunc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-char-enc-in-func
@findex xmlCharEncInFunc
Alias for @func{xmlCharEncInFunc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-char-enc-first-line
@findex xmlCharEncFirstLine
Alias for @func{xmlCharEncFirstLine}.
@end defun


@defun xml-char-enc-close-func
@findex xmlCharEncCloseFunc
Alias for @func{xmlCharEncCloseFunc}.
@end defun


@defun utf8-to-isolat1
@findex UTF8Toisolat1
Alias for @func{UTF8Toisolat1}.
@end defun


@defun isolat1-to-utf8
@findex isolat1ToUTF8
Alias for @func{isolat1ToUTF8}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Interface for the @axml{} entities handling

@defun xml-initialize-predefined-entities
@findex xmlInitializePredefinedEntities
Alias for @func{xmlInitializePredefinedEntities}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-entity
@findex xmlNewEntity
Alias for @func{xmlNewEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-doc-entity
@findex xmlAddDocEntity
Alias for @func{xmlAddDocEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-dtd-entity
@findex xmlAddDtdEntity
Alias for @func{xmlAddDtdEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-predefined-entity
@findex xmlGetPredefinedEntity
Alias for @func{xmlGetPredefinedEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-doc-entity
@findex xmlGetDocEntity
Alias for @func{xmlGetDocEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-dtd-entity
@findex xmlGetDtdEntity
Alias for @func{xmlGetDtdEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-parameter-entity
@findex xmlGetParameterEntity
Alias for @func{xmlGetParameterEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-encode-entities
@findex xmlEncodeEntities
Alias for @func{xmlEncodeEntities}.
@end defun


@defun xml-encode-entities-reentrant
@findex xmlEncodeEntitiesReentrant
Alias for @func{xmlEncodeEntitiesReentrant}.
@end defun


@defun xml-encode-special-chars
@findex xmlEncodeSpecialChars
Alias for @func{xmlEncodeSpecialChars}.
@end defun


@defun xml-create-entities-table
@findex xmlCreateEntitiesTable
Alias for @func{xmlCreateEntitiesTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-entities-table
@findex xmlCopyEntitiesTable
Alias for @func{xmlCopyEntitiesTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-entities-table
@findex xmlFreeEntitiesTable
Alias for @func{xmlFreeEntitiesTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dump-entities-table
@findex xmlDumpEntitiesTable
Alias for @func{xmlDumpEntitiesTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dump-entity-decl
@findex xmlDumpEntityDecl
Alias for @func{xmlDumpEntityDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-cleanup-predefined-entities
@findex xmlCleanupPredefinedEntities
Alias for @func{xmlCleanupPredefinedEntities}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Interface for all global variables of the library

@defun xml-init-globals
@findex xmlInitGlobals
Alias for @func{xmlInitGlobals}.
@end defun


@defun xml-cleanup-globals
@findex xmlCleanupGlobals
Alias for @func{xmlCleanupGlobals}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-create-filename-default
@findex xmlParserInputBufferCreateFilenameDefault
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferCreateFilenameDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-create-filename-default
@findex xmlOutputBufferCreateFilenameDefault
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferCreateFilenameDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-initialize-global-state
@findex xmlInitializeGlobalState
Alias for @func{xmlInitializeGlobalState}.
@end defun


@defun xml-thr-def-set-generic-error-func
@findex xmlThrDefSetGenericErrorFunc
Alias for @func{xmlThrDefSetGenericErrorFunc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-thr-def-set-structured-error-func
@findex xmlThrDefSetStructuredErrorFunc
Alias for @func{xmlThrDefSetStructuredErrorFunc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-register-node-default
@findex xmlRegisterNodeDefault
Alias for @func{xmlRegisterNodeDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-thr-def-register-node-default
@findex xmlThrDefRegisterNodeDefault
Alias for @func{xmlThrDefRegisterNodeDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-deregister-node-default
@findex xmlDeregisterNodeDefault
Alias for @func{xmlDeregisterNodeDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-thr-def-deregister-node-default
@findex xmlThrDefDeregisterNodeDefault
Alias for @func{xmlThrDefDeregisterNodeDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-thr-def-output-buffer-create-filename-default
@findex xmlThrDefOutputBufferCreateFilenameDefault
Alias for @func{xmlThrDefOutputBufferCreateFilenameDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-thr-def-parser-input-buffer-create-filename-default
@findex xmlThrDefParserInputBufferCreateFilenameDefault
Alias for @func{xmlThrDefParserInputBufferCreateFilenameDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-malloc
@findex xmlMalloc
Alias for @func{xmlMalloc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-malloc-atomic
@findex xmlMallocAtomic
Alias for @func{xmlMallocAtomic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-realloc
@findex xmlRealloc
Alias for @func{xmlRealloc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free
@findex xmlFree
Alias for @func{xmlFree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-strdup
@findex xmlMemStrdup
Alias for @func{xmlMemStrdup}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Chained hash tables

@defun xml-hash-create
@findex xmlHashCreate
Alias for @func{xmlHashCreate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-create-dict
@findex xmlHashCreateDict
Alias for @func{xmlHashCreateDict}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-free
@findex xmlHashFree
Alias for @func{xmlHashFree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-add-entry
@findex xmlHashAddEntry
Alias for @func{xmlHashAddEntry}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-update-entry
@findex xmlHashUpdateEntry
Alias for @func{xmlHashUpdateEntry}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-add-entry2
@findex xmlHashAddEntry2
Alias for @func{xmlHashAddEntry2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-update-entry2
@findex xmlHashUpdateEntry2
Alias for @func{xmlHashUpdateEntry2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-add-entry3
@findex xmlHashAddEntry3
Alias for @func{xmlHashAddEntry3}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-update-entry3
@findex xmlHashUpdateEntry3
Alias for @func{xmlHashUpdateEntry3}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-remove-entry
@findex xmlHashRemoveEntry
Alias for @func{xmlHashRemoveEntry}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-remove-entry2
@findex xmlHashRemoveEntry2
Alias for @func{xmlHashRemoveEntry2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-remove-entry3
@findex xmlHashRemoveEntry3
Alias for @func{xmlHashRemoveEntry3}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-lookup
@findex xmlHashLookup
Alias for @func{xmlHashLookup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-lookup2
@findex xmlHashLookup2
Alias for @func{xmlHashLookup2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-lookup3
@findex xmlHashLookup3
Alias for @func{xmlHashLookup3}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-qlookup
@findex xmlHashQLookup
Alias for @func{xmlHashQLookup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-qlookup2
@findex xmlHashQLookup2
Alias for @func{xmlHashQLookup2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-qlookup3
@findex xmlHashQLookup3
Alias for @func{xmlHashQLookup3}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-copy
@findex xmlHashCopy
Alias for @func{xmlHashCopy}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-size
@findex xmlHashSize
Alias for @func{xmlHashSize}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-scan
@findex xmlHashScan
Alias for @func{xmlHashScan}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-scan3
@findex xmlHashScan3
Alias for @func{xmlHashScan3}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-scan-full
@findex xmlHashScanFull
Alias for @func{xmlHashScanFull}.
@end defun


@defun xml-hash-scan-full3
@findex xmlHashScanFull3
Alias for @func{xmlHashScanFull3}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading HTML parser

@defun html-tag-lookup
@findex htmlTagLookup
Alias for @func{htmlTagLookup}.
@end defun


@defun html-entity-lookup
@findex htmlEntityLookup
Alias for @func{htmlEntityLookup}.
@end defun


@defun html-entity-value-lookup
@findex htmlEntityValueLookup
Alias for @func{htmlEntityValueLookup}.
@end defun


@defun html-is-auto-closed
@findex htmlIsAutoClosed
Alias for @func{htmlIsAutoClosed}.
@end defun


@defun html-auto-close-tag
@findex htmlAutoCloseTag
Alias for @func{htmlAutoCloseTag}.
@end defun


@defun html-parse-entity-ref
@findex htmlParseEntityRef
Alias for @func{htmlParseEntityRef}.
@end defun


@defun html-parse-char-ref
@findex htmlParseCharRef
Alias for @func{htmlParseCharRef}.
@end defun


@defun html-parse-element
@findex htmlParseElement
Alias for @func{htmlParseElement}.
@end defun


@defun html-new-parser-ctxt
@findex htmlNewParserCtxt
Alias for @func{htmlNewParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun html-create-memory-parser-ctxt
@findex htmlCreateMemoryParserCtxt
Alias for @func{htmlCreateMemoryParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun html-parse-document
@findex htmlParseDocument
Alias for @func{htmlParseDocument}.
@end defun


@defun html-sax-parse-doc
@findex htmlSAXParseDoc
Alias for @func{htmlSAXParseDoc}.
@end defun


@defun html-parse-doc
@findex htmlParseDoc
Alias for @func{htmlParseDoc}.
@end defun


@defun html-sax-parse-file
@findex htmlSAXParseFile
Alias for @func{htmlSAXParseFile}.
@end defun


@defun html-parse-file
@findex htmlParseFile
Alias for @func{htmlParseFile}.
@end defun


@defun utf8-to-html
@findex UTF8ToHtml
Alias for @func{UTF8ToHtml}.
@end defun


@defun html-encode-entities
@findex htmlEncodeEntities
Alias for @func{htmlEncodeEntities}.
@end defun


@defun html-is-script-attribute
@findex htmlIsScriptAttribute
Alias for @func{htmlIsScriptAttribute}.
@end defun


@defun html-handle-omitted-elem
@findex htmlHandleOmittedElem
Alias for @func{htmlHandleOmittedElem}.
@end defun


@defun html-create-push-parser-ctxt
@findex htmlCreatePushParserCtxt
Alias for @func{htmlCreatePushParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun html-parse-chunk
@findex htmlParseChunk
Alias for @func{htmlParseChunk}.
@end defun


@defun html-free-parser-ctxt
@findex htmlFreeParserCtxt
Alias for @func{htmlFreeParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun html-ctxt-reset
@findex htmlCtxtReset
Alias for @func{htmlCtxtReset}.
@end defun


@defun html-ctxt-use-options
@findex htmlCtxtUseOptions
Alias for @func{htmlCtxtUseOptions}.
@end defun


@defun html-read-doc
@findex htmlReadDoc
Alias for @func{htmlReadDoc}.
@end defun


@defun html-read-file
@findex htmlReadFile
Alias for @func{htmlReadFile}.
@end defun


@defun html-read-memory
@findex htmlReadMemory
Alias for @func{htmlReadMemory}.
@end defun


@defun html-read-fd
@findex htmlReadFd
Alias for @func{htmlReadFd}.
@end defun


@defun html-read-io
@findex htmlReadIO
Alias for @func{htmlReadIO}.
@end defun


@defun html-ctxt-read-doc
@findex htmlCtxtReadDoc
Alias for @func{htmlCtxtReadDoc}.
@end defun


@defun html-ctxt-read-file
@findex htmlCtxtReadFile
Alias for @func{htmlCtxtReadFile}.
@end defun


@defun html-ctxt-read-memory
@findex htmlCtxtReadMemory
Alias for @func{htmlCtxtReadMemory}.
@end defun


@defun html-ctxt-read-fd
@findex htmlCtxtReadFd
Alias for @func{htmlCtxtReadFd}.
@end defun


@defun html-ctxt-read-io
@findex htmlCtxtReadIO
Alias for @func{htmlCtxtReadIO}.
@end defun


@defun html-attr-allowed
@findex htmlAttrAllowed
Alias for @func{htmlAttrAllowed}.
@end defun


@defun html-element-allowed-here
@findex htmlElementAllowedHere
Alias for @func{htmlElementAllowedHere}.
@end defun


@defun html-element-status-here
@findex htmlElementStatusHere
Alias for @func{htmlElementStatusHere}.
@end defun


@defun html-node-status
@findex htmlNodeStatus
Alias for @func{htmlNodeStatus}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Specific @api{}s to process @acronym{HTML} tree

@defun html-new-doc
@findex htmlNewDoc
Alias for @func{htmlNewDoc}.
@end defun


@defun html-new-doc-no-dtd
@findex htmlNewDocNoDtD
Alias for @func{htmlNewDocNoDtD}.
@end defun


@defun html-get-meta-encoding
@findex htmlGetMetaEncoding
Alias for @func{htmlGetMetaEncoding}.
@end defun


@defun html-set-meta-encoding
@findex htmlSetMetaEncoding
Alias for @func{htmlSetMetaEncoding}.
@end defun


@defun html-doc-dump-memory
@findex htmlDocDumpMemory
Alias for @func{htmlDocDumpMemory}.
@end defun


@defun html-doc-dump-memory-format
@findex htmlDocDumpMemoryFormat
Alias for @func{htmlDocDumpMemoryFormat}.
@end defun


@defun html-doc-dump
@findex htmlDocDump
Alias for @func{htmlDocDump}.
@end defun


@defun html-save-file
@findex htmlSaveFile
Alias for @func{htmlSaveFile}.
@end defun


@defun html-node-dump
@findex htmlNodeDump
Alias for @func{htmlNodeDump}.
@end defun


@defun html-node-dump-file
@findex htmlNodeDumpFile
Alias for @func{htmlNodeDumpFile}.
@end defun


@defun html-node-dump-file-format
@findex htmlNodeDumpFileFormat
Alias for @func{htmlNodeDumpFileFormat}.
@end defun


@defun html-save-file-enc
@findex htmlSaveFileEnc
Alias for @func{htmlSaveFileEnc}.
@end defun


@defun html-save-file-format
@findex htmlSaveFileFormat
Alias for @func{htmlSaveFileFormat}.
@end defun


@defun html-node-dump-format-output
@findex htmlNodeDumpFormatOutput
Alias for @func{htmlNodeDumpFormatOutput}.
@end defun


@defun html-doc-content-dump-output
@findex htmlDocContentDumpOutput
Alias for @func{htmlDocContentDumpOutput}.
@end defun


@defun html-doc-content-dump-format-output
@findex htmlDocContentDumpFormatOutput
Alias for @func{htmlDocContentDumpFormatOutput}.
@end defun


@defun html-node-dump-output
@findex htmlNodeDumpOutput
Alias for @func{htmlNodeDumpOutput}.
@end defun


@defun html-is-boolean-attr
@findex htmlIsBooleanAttr
Alias for @func{htmlIsBooleanAttr}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Lists interfaces

@defun xml-list-create
@findex xmlListCreate
Alias for @func{xmlListCreate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-delete
@findex xmlListDelete
Alias for @func{xmlListDelete}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-search
@findex xmlListSearch
Alias for @func{xmlListSearch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-reverse-search
@findex xmlListReverseSearch
Alias for @func{xmlListReverseSearch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-insert
@findex xmlListInsert
Alias for @func{xmlListInsert}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-append
@findex xmlListAppend
Alias for @func{xmlListAppend}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-remove-first
@findex xmlListRemoveFirst
Alias for @func{xmlListRemoveFirst}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-remove-last
@findex xmlListRemoveLast
Alias for @func{xmlListRemoveLast}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-remove-all
@findex xmlListRemoveAll
Alias for @func{xmlListRemoveAll}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-clear
@findex xmlListClear
Alias for @func{xmlListClear}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-empty
@findex xmlListEmpty
Alias for @func{xmlListEmpty}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-front
@findex xmlListFront
Alias for @func{xmlListFront}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-end
@findex xmlListEnd
Alias for @func{xmlListEnd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-size
@findex xmlListSize
Alias for @func{xmlListSize}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-pop-front
@findex xmlListPopFront
Alias for @func{xmlListPopFront}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-pop-back
@findex xmlListPopBack
Alias for @func{xmlListPopBack}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-push-front
@findex xmlListPushFront
Alias for @func{xmlListPushFront}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-push-back
@findex xmlListPushBack
Alias for @func{xmlListPushBack}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-reverse
@findex xmlListReverse
Alias for @func{xmlListReverse}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-sort
@findex xmlListSort
Alias for @func{xmlListSort}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-walk
@findex xmlListWalk
Alias for @func{xmlListWalk}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-reverse-walk
@findex xmlListReverseWalk
Alias for @func{xmlListReverseWalk}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-merge
@findex xmlListMerge
Alias for @func{xmlListMerge}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-dup
@findex xmlListDup
Alias for @func{xmlListDup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-list-copy
@findex xmlListCopy
Alias for @func{xmlListCopy}.
@end defun


@defun xml-link-get-data
@findex xmlLinkGetData
Alias for @func{xmlLinkGetData}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Minimal @ftp{} implementation

@defun xml-nano-ftp-init
@findex xmlNanoFTPInit
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPInit}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-cleanup
@findex xmlNanoFTPCleanup
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPCleanup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-new-ctxt
@findex xmlNanoFTPNewCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPNewCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-free-ctxt
@findex xmlNanoFTPFreeCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPFreeCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-connect-to
@findex xmlNanoFTPConnectTo
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPConnectTo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-open
@findex xmlNanoFTPOpen
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPOpen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-connect
@findex xmlNanoFTPConnect
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPConnect}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-close
@findex xmlNanoFTPClose
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPClose}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-quit
@findex xmlNanoFTPQuit
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPQuit}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-scan-proxy
@findex xmlNanoFTPScanProxy
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPScanProxy}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-proxy
@findex xmlNanoFTPProxy
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPProxy}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-update-url
@findex xmlNanoFTPUpdateURL
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPUpdateURL}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-get-response
@findex xmlNanoFTPGetResponse
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPGetResponse}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-check-response
@findex xmlNanoFTPCheckResponse
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPCheckResponse}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-cwd
@findex xmlNanoFTPCwd
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPCwd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-dele
@findex xmlNanoFTPDele
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPDele}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-get-connection
@findex xmlNanoFTPGetConnection
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPGetConnection}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-close-connection
@findex xmlNanoFTPCloseConnection
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPCloseConnection}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-list
@findex xmlNanoFTPList
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-get-socket
@findex xmlNanoFTPGetSocket
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPGetSocket}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-get
@findex xmlNanoFTPGet
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPGet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-ftp-read
@findex xmlNanoFTPRead
Alias for @func{xmlNanoFTPRead}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Minimal @http{} implementation

@defun xml-nano-http-init
@findex xmlNanoHTTPInit
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPInit}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-cleanup
@findex xmlNanoHTTPCleanup
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPCleanup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-scan-proxy
@findex xmlNanoHTTPScanProxy
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPScanProxy}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-fetch
@findex xmlNanoHTTPFetch
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPFetch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-method
@findex xmlNanoHTTPMethod
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPMethod}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-method-redir
@findex xmlNanoHTTPMethodRedir
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPMethodRedir}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-open
@findex xmlNanoHTTPOpen
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPOpen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-open-redir
@findex xmlNanoHTTPOpenRedir
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPOpenRedir}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-return-code
@findex xmlNanoHTTPReturnCode
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPReturnCode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-auth-header
@findex xmlNanoHTTPAuthHeader
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPAuthHeader}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-redir
@findex xmlNanoHTTPRedir
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPRedir}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-content-length
@findex xmlNanoHTTPContentLength
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPContentLength}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-encoding
@findex xmlNanoHTTPEncoding
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPEncoding}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-mime-type
@findex xmlNanoHTTPMimeType
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPMimeType}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-read
@findex xmlNanoHTTPRead
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPRead}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-save
@findex xmlNanoHTTPSave
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPSave}.
@end defun


@defun xml-nano-http-close
@findex xmlNanoHTTPClose
Alias for @func{xmlNanoHTTPClose}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The core parser module

@defun xml-init-parser
@findex xmlInitParser
Alias for @func{xmlInitParser}.
@end defun


@defun xml-cleanup-parser
@findex xmlCleanupParser
Alias for @func{xmlCleanupParser}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-read
@findex xmlParserInputRead
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputRead}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-grow
@findex xmlParserInputGrow
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputGrow}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-doc
@findex xmlParseDoc
Alias for @func{xmlParseDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-file
@findex xmlParseFile
Alias for @func{xmlParseFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-memory
@findex xmlParseMemory
Alias for @func{xmlParseMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-substitute-entities-default
@findex xmlSubstituteEntitiesDefault
Alias for @func{xmlSubstituteEntitiesDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-keep-blanks-default
@findex xmlKeepBlanksDefault
Alias for @func{xmlKeepBlanksDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-stop-parser
@findex xmlStopParser
Alias for @func{xmlStopParser}.
@end defun


@defun xml-pedantic-parser-default
@findex xmlPedanticParserDefault
Alias for @func{xmlPedanticParserDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-line-numbers-default
@findex xmlLineNumbersDefault
Alias for @func{xmlLineNumbersDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-recover-doc
@findex xmlRecoverDoc
Alias for @func{xmlRecoverDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-recover-memory
@findex xmlRecoverMemory
Alias for @func{xmlRecoverMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-recover-file
@findex xmlRecoverFile
Alias for @func{xmlRecoverFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-document
@findex xmlParseDocument
Alias for @func{xmlParseDocument}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-ext-parsed-ent
@findex xmlParseExtParsedEnt
Alias for @func{xmlParseExtParsedEnt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-user-parse-file
@findex xmlSAXUserParseFile
Alias for @func{xmlSAXUserParseFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-user-parse-memory
@findex xmlSAXUserParseMemory
Alias for @func{xmlSAXUserParseMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-parse-doc
@findex xmlSAXParseDoc
Alias for @func{xmlSAXParseDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-parse-memory
@findex xmlSAXParseMemory
Alias for @func{xmlSAXParseMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-parse-memory-with-data
@findex xmlSAXParseMemoryWithData
Alias for @func{xmlSAXParseMemoryWithData}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-parse-file
@findex xmlSAXParseFile
Alias for @func{xmlSAXParseFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-parse-file-with-data
@findex xmlSAXParseFileWithData
Alias for @func{xmlSAXParseFileWithData}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-parse-entity
@findex xmlSAXParseEntity
Alias for @func{xmlSAXParseEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-entity
@findex xmlParseEntity
Alias for @func{xmlParseEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-parse-dtd
@findex xmlSAXParseDTD
Alias for @func{xmlSAXParseDTD}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-dtd
@findex xmlParseDTD
Alias for @func{xmlParseDTD}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-parse-dtd
@findex xmlIOParseDTD
Alias for @func{xmlIOParseDTD}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-balanced-chunk-memory
@findex xmlParseBalancedChunkMemory
Alias for @func{xmlParseBalancedChunkMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-in-node-context
@findex xmlParseInNodeContext
Alias for @func{xmlParseInNodeContext}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-balanced-chunk-memory-recover
@findex xmlParseBalancedChunkMemoryRecover
Alias for @func{xmlParseBalancedChunkMemoryRecover}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-external-entity
@findex xmlParseExternalEntity
Alias for @func{xmlParseExternalEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-ctxt-external-entity
@findex xmlParseCtxtExternalEntity
Alias for @func{xmlParseCtxtExternalEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlNewParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlNewParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-init-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlInitParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlInitParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-clear-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlClearParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlClearParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlFreeParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlFreeParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-setup-parser-for-buffer
@findex xmlSetupParserForBuffer
Alias for @func{xmlSetupParserForBuffer}.
@end defun


@defun xml-create-doc-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlCreateDocParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlCreateDocParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-features-list
@findex xmlGetFeaturesList
Alias for @func{xmlGetFeaturesList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-feature
@findex xmlGetFeature
Alias for @func{xmlGetFeature}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-feature
@findex xmlSetFeature
Alias for @func{xmlSetFeature}.
@end defun


@defun xml-create-push-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlCreatePushParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlCreatePushParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-chunk
@findex xmlParseChunk
Alias for @func{xmlParseChunk}.
@end defun


@defun xml-create-io-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlCreateIOParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlCreateIOParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-io-input-stream
@findex xmlNewIOInputStream
Alias for @func{xmlNewIOInputStream}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-find-node-info
@findex xmlParserFindNodeInfo
Alias for @func{xmlParserFindNodeInfo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-init-node-info-seq
@findex xmlInitNodeInfoSeq
Alias for @func{xmlInitNodeInfoSeq}.
@end defun


@defun xml-clear-node-info-seq
@findex xmlClearNodeInfoSeq
Alias for @func{xmlClearNodeInfoSeq}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-find-node-info-index
@findex xmlParserFindNodeInfoIndex
Alias for @func{xmlParserFindNodeInfoIndex}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-add-node-info
@findex xmlParserAddNodeInfo
Alias for @func{xmlParserAddNodeInfo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-external-entity-loader
@findex xmlSetExternalEntityLoader
Alias for @func{xmlSetExternalEntityLoader}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-external-entity-loader
@findex xmlGetExternalEntityLoader
Alias for @func{xmlGetExternalEntityLoader}.
@end defun


@defun xml-load-external-entity
@findex xmlLoadExternalEntity
Alias for @func{xmlLoadExternalEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-byte-consumed
@findex xmlByteConsumed
Alias for @func{xmlByteConsumed}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-reset
@findex xmlCtxtReset
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtReset}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-reset-push
@findex xmlCtxtResetPush
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtResetPush}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-use-options
@findex xmlCtxtUseOptions
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtUseOptions}.
@end defun


@defun xml-read-doc
@findex xmlReadDoc
Alias for @func{xmlReadDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-read-file
@findex xmlReadFile
Alias for @func{xmlReadFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-read-memory
@findex xmlReadMemory
Alias for @func{xmlReadMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-read-fd
@findex xmlReadFd
Alias for @func{xmlReadFd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-read-io
@findex xmlReadIO
Alias for @func{xmlReadIO}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-read-doc
@findex xmlCtxtReadDoc
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtReadDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-read-file
@findex xmlCtxtReadFile
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtReadFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-read-memory
@findex xmlCtxtReadMemory
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtReadMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-read-fd
@findex xmlCtxtReadFd
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtReadFd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-read-io
@findex xmlCtxtReadIO
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtReadIO}.
@end defun


@defun xml-has-feature
@findex xmlHasFeature
Alias for @func{xmlHasFeature}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Pattern expression handling

@defun xml-free-pattern
@findex xmlFreePattern
Alias for @func{xmlFreePattern}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-pattern-list
@findex xmlFreePatternList
Alias for @func{xmlFreePatternList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-patterncompile
@findex xmlPatterncompile
Alias for @func{xmlPatterncompile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-pattern-match
@findex xmlPatternMatch
Alias for @func{xmlPatternMatch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-pattern-streamable
@findex xmlPatternStreamable
Alias for @func{xmlPatternStreamable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-pattern-max-depth
@findex xmlPatternMaxDepth
Alias for @func{xmlPatternMaxDepth}.
@end defun


@defun xml-pattern-min-depth
@findex xmlPatternMinDepth
Alias for @func{xmlPatternMinDepth}.
@end defun


@defun xml-pattern-from-root
@findex xmlPatternFromRoot
Alias for @func{xmlPatternFromRoot}.
@end defun


@defun xml-pattern-get-stream-ctxt
@findex xmlPatternGetStreamCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlPatternGetStreamCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-stream-ctxt
@findex xmlFreeStreamCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlFreeStreamCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-stream-push-node
@findex xmlStreamPushNode
Alias for @func{xmlStreamPushNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-stream-push
@findex xmlStreamPush
Alias for @func{xmlStreamPush}.
@end defun


@defun xml-stream-push-attr
@findex xmlStreamPushAttr
Alias for @func{xmlStreamPushAttr}.
@end defun


@defun xml-stream-pop
@findex xmlStreamPop
Alias for @func{xmlStreamPop}.
@end defun


@defun xml-stream-wants-any-node
@findex xmlStreamWantsAnyNode
Alias for @func{xmlStreamWantsAnyNode}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Implementation of the Relax-NG validation

@defun xml-relax-ng-init-types
@findex xmlRelaxNGInitTypes
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGInitTypes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-cleanup-types
@findex xmlRelaxNGCleanupTypes
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGCleanupTypes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-new-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlRelaxNGNewParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGNewParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-new-mem-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlRelaxNGNewMemParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGNewMemParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-new-doc-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlRelaxNGNewDocParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGNewDocParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-parser-set-flag
@findex xmlRelaxParserSetFlag
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxParserSetFlag}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-free-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlRelaxNGFreeParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGFreeParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-set-parser-errors
@findex xmlRelaxNGSetParserErrors
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGSetParserErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-get-parser-errors
@findex xmlRelaxNGGetParserErrors
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGGetParserErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-set-parser-structured-errors
@findex xmlRelaxNGSetParserStructuredErrors
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGSetParserStructuredErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-parse
@findex xmlRelaxNGParse
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGParse}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-free
@findex xmlRelaxNGFree
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGFree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-dump
@findex xmlRelaxNGDump
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-dump-tree
@findex xmlRelaxNGDumpTree
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGDumpTree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-set-valid-errors
@findex xmlRelaxNGSetValidErrors
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGSetValidErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-get-valid-errors
@findex xmlRelaxNGGetValidErrors
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGGetValidErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-set-valid-structured-errors
@findex xmlRelaxNGSetValidStructuredErrors
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGSetValidStructuredErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-new-valid-ctxt
@findex xmlRelaxNGNewValidCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGNewValidCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-free-valid-ctxt
@findex xmlRelaxNGFreeValidCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGFreeValidCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-validate-doc
@findex xmlRelaxNGValidateDoc
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGValidateDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-validate-push-element
@findex xmlRelaxNGValidatePushElement
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGValidatePushElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-validate-push-cdata
@findex xmlRelaxNGValidatePushCData
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGValidatePushCData}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-validate-pop-element
@findex xmlRelaxNGValidatePopElement
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGValidatePopElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-relax-ng-validate-full-element
@findex xmlRelaxNGValidateFullElement
Alias for @func{xmlRelaxNGValidateFullElement}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @acronym{SAX2} parser interface used to build the @acronym{DOM} tree

@defun xml-sax2-get-public-id
@findex xmlSAX2GetPublicId
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2GetPublicId}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-get-system-id
@findex xmlSAX2GetSystemId
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2GetSystemId}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-set-document-locator
@findex xmlSAX2SetDocumentLocator
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2SetDocumentLocator}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-get-line-number
@findex xmlSAX2GetLineNumber
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2GetLineNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-get-column-number
@findex xmlSAX2GetColumnNumber
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2GetColumnNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-is-standalone
@findex xmlSAX2IsStandalone
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2IsStandalone}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-has-internal-subset
@findex xmlSAX2HasInternalSubset
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2HasInternalSubset}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-has-external-subset
@findex xmlSAX2HasExternalSubset
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2HasExternalSubset}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-internal-subset
@findex xmlSAX2InternalSubset
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2InternalSubset}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-external-subset
@findex xmlSAX2ExternalSubset
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2ExternalSubset}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-get-entity
@findex xmlSAX2GetEntity
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2GetEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-get-parameter-entity
@findex xmlSAX2GetParameterEntity
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2GetParameterEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-resolve-entity
@findex xmlSAX2ResolveEntity
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2ResolveEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-entity-decl
@findex xmlSAX2EntityDecl
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2EntityDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-attribute-decl
@findex xmlSAX2AttributeDecl
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2AttributeDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-element-decl
@findex xmlSAX2ElementDecl
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2ElementDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-notation-decl
@findex xmlSAX2NotationDecl
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2NotationDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-unparsed-entity-decl
@findex xmlSAX2UnparsedEntityDecl
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2UnparsedEntityDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-start-document
@findex xmlSAX2StartDocument
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2StartDocument}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-end-document
@findex xmlSAX2EndDocument
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2EndDocument}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-start-element
@findex xmlSAX2StartElement
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2StartElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-end-element
@findex xmlSAX2EndElement
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2EndElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-start-element-ns
@findex xmlSAX2StartElementNs
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2StartElementNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-end-element-ns
@findex xmlSAX2EndElementNs
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2EndElementNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-reference
@findex xmlSAX2Reference
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2Reference}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-characters
@findex xmlSAX2Characters
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2Characters}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-ignorable-whitespace
@findex xmlSAX2IgnorableWhitespace
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2IgnorableWhitespace}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-processing-instruction
@findex xmlSAX2ProcessingInstruction
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2ProcessingInstruction}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-comment
@findex xmlSAX2Comment
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2Comment}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-cdata-block
@findex xmlSAX2CDataBlock
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2CDataBlock}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-default-version
@findex xmlSAXDefaultVersion
Alias for @func{xmlSAXDefaultVersion}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax-version
@findex xmlSAXVersion
Alias for @func{xmlSAXVersion}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-init-default-sax-handler
@findex xmlSAX2InitDefaultSAXHandler
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2InitDefaultSAXHandler}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-init-html-default-sax-handler
@findex xmlSAX2InitHtmlDefaultSAXHandler
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2InitHtmlDefaultSAXHandler}.
@end defun


@defun html-default-sax-handler-init
@findex htmlDefaultSAXHandlerInit
Alias for @func{htmlDefaultSAXHandlerInit}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sax2-init-docb-default-sax-handler
@findex xmlSAX2InitDocbDefaultSAXHandler
Alias for @func{xmlSAX2InitDocbDefaultSAXHandler}.
@end defun


@defun docb-default-sax-handler-init
@findex docbDefaultSAXHandlerInit
Alias for @func{docbDefaultSAXHandlerInit}.
@end defun


@defun xml-default-sax-handler-init
@findex xmlDefaultSAXHandlerInit
Alias for @func{xmlDefaultSAXHandlerInit}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @axml{} Schematron implementation

@defun xml-schematron-new-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlSchematronNewParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronNewParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schematron-new-mem-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlSchematronNewMemParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronNewMemParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schematron-new-doc-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlSchematronNewDocParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronNewDocParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schematron-free-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlSchematronFreeParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronFreeParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@c xmlSchematronSetParserErrors
@c xmlSchematronGetParserErrors
@c xmlSchematronIsValid

@defun xml-schematron-parse
@findex xmlSchematronParse
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronParse}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schematron-free
@findex xmlSchematronFree
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronFree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schematron-set-valid-structured-errors
@findex xmlSchematronSetValidStructuredErrors
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronSetValidStructuredErrors}.
@end defun


@c    xmlSchematronSetValidErrors
@c    xmlSchematronGetValidErrors
@c    xmlSchematronSetValidOptions
@c    xmlSchematronValidCtxtGetOptions
@c    xmlSchematronValidateOneElement

@defun xml-schematron-new-valid-ctxt
@findex xmlSchematronNewValidCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronNewValidCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schematron-free-valid-ctxt
@findex xmlSchematronFreeValidCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronFreeValidCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schematron-validate-doc
@findex xmlSchematronValidateDoc
Alias for @func{xmlSchematronValidateDoc}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Interfaces for thread handling

@defun xml-new-mutex
@findex xmlNewMutex
Alias for @func{xmlNewMutex}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mutex-lock
@findex xmlMutexLock
Alias for @func{xmlMutexLock}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mutex-unlock
@findex xmlMutexUnlock
Alias for @func{xmlMutexUnlock}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-mutex
@findex xmlFreeMutex
Alias for @func{xmlFreeMutex}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-rmutex
@findex xmlNewRMutex
Alias for @func{xmlNewRMutex}.
@end defun


@defun xml-rmutex-lock
@findex xmlRMutexLock
Alias for @func{xmlRMutexLock}.
@end defun


@defun xml-rmutex-unlock
@findex xmlRMutexUnlock
Alias for @func{xmlRMutexUnlock}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-rmutex
@findex xmlFreeRMutex
Alias for @func{xmlFreeRMutex}.
@end defun


@defun xml-init-threads
@findex xmlInitThreads
Alias for @func{xmlInitThreads}.
@end defun


@defun xml-lock-library
@findex xmlLockLibrary
Alias for @func{xmlLockLibrary}.
@end defun


@defun xml-unlock-library
@findex xmlUnlockLibrary
Alias for @func{xmlUnlockLibrary}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-thread-id
@findex xmlGetThreadId
Alias for @func{xmlGetThreadId}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-main-thread
@findex xmlIsMainThread
Alias for @func{xmlIsMainThread}.
@end defun


@defun xml-cleanup-threads
@findex xmlCleanupThreads
Alias for @func{xmlCleanupThreads}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-global-state
@findex xmlGetGlobalState
Alias for @func{xmlGetGlobalState}.
@end defun

@c    xmlDllMain

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Interfaces for tree manipulation

@defun xml-validate-ncname
@findex xmlValidateNCName
Alias for @func{xmlValidateNCName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-qname
@findex xmlValidateQName
Alias for @func{xmlValidateQName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-name
@findex xmlValidateName
Alias for @func{xmlValidateName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-nmtoken
@findex xmlValidateNMToken
Alias for @func{xmlValidateNMToken}.
@end defun


@defun xml-build-qname
@findex xmlBuildQName
Alias for @func{xmlBuildQName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-split-qname2
@findex xmlSplitQName2
Alias for @func{xmlSplitQName2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-split-qname3
@findex xmlSplitQName3
Alias for @func{xmlSplitQName3}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-buffer-allocation-scheme
@findex xmlSetBufferAllocationScheme
Alias for @func{xmlSetBufferAllocationScheme}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-buffer-allocation-scheme
@findex xmlGetBufferAllocationScheme
Alias for @func{xmlGetBufferAllocationScheme}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-create
@findex xmlBufferCreate
Alias for @func{xmlBufferCreate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-create-size
@findex xmlBufferCreateSize
Alias for @func{xmlBufferCreateSize}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-create-static
@findex xmlBufferCreateStatic
Alias for @func{xmlBufferCreateStatic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-resize
@findex xmlBufferResize
Alias for @func{xmlBufferResize}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-free
@findex xmlBufferFree
Alias for @func{xmlBufferFree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-dump
@findex xmlBufferDump
Alias for @func{xmlBufferDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-add
@findex xmlBufferAdd
Alias for @func{xmlBufferAdd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-add-head
@findex xmlBufferAddHead
Alias for @func{xmlBufferAddHead}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-cat
@findex xmlBufferCat
Alias for @func{xmlBufferCat}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-ccat
@findex xmlBufferCCat
Alias for @func{xmlBufferCCat}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-shrink
@findex xmlBufferShrink
Alias for @func{xmlBufferShrink}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-grow
@findex xmlBufferGrow
Alias for @func{xmlBufferGrow}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-empty
@findex xmlBufferEmpty
Alias for @func{xmlBufferEmpty}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-content
@findex xmlBufferContent
Alias for @func{xmlBufferContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-set-allocation-scheme
@findex xmlBufferSetAllocationScheme
Alias for @func{xmlBufferSetAllocationScheme}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-length
@findex xmlBufferLength
Alias for @func{xmlBufferLength}.
@end defun


@defun xml-create-int-subset
@findex xmlCreateIntSubset
Alias for @func{xmlCreateIntSubset}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-dtd
@findex xmlNewDtd
Alias for @func{xmlNewDtd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-int-subset
@findex xmlGetIntSubset
Alias for @func{xmlGetIntSubset}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-dtd
@findex xmlFreeDtd
Alias for @func{xmlFreeDtd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-global-ns
@findex xmlNewGlobalNs
Alias for @func{xmlNewGlobalNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-ns
@findex xmlNewNs
Alias for @func{xmlNewNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-ns
@findex xmlFreeNs
Alias for @func{xmlFreeNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-ns-list
@findex xmlFreeNsList
Alias for @func{xmlFreeNsList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc
@findex xmlNewDoc
Alias for @func{xmlNewDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-doc
@findex xmlFreeDoc
Alias for @func{xmlFreeDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-prop
@findex xmlNewDocProp
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-prop
@findex xmlNewProp
Alias for @func{xmlNewProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-ns-prop
@findex xmlNewNsProp
Alias for @func{xmlNewNsProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-ns-prop-eat-name
@findex xmlNewNsPropEatName
Alias for @func{xmlNewNsPropEatName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-prop-list
@findex xmlFreePropList
Alias for @func{xmlFreePropList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-prop
@findex xmlFreeProp
Alias for @func{xmlFreeProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-prop
@findex xmlCopyProp
Alias for @func{xmlCopyProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-prop-list
@findex xmlCopyPropList
Alias for @func{xmlCopyPropList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-dtd
@findex xmlCopyDtd
Alias for @func{xmlCopyDtd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-doc
@findex xmlCopyDoc
Alias for @func{xmlCopyDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-node
@findex xmlNewDocNode
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-node-eat-name
@findex xmlNewDocNodeEatName
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocNodeEatName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-node
@findex xmlNewNode
Alias for @func{xmlNewNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-node-eat-name
@findex xmlNewNodeEatName
Alias for @func{xmlNewNodeEatName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-child
@findex xmlNewChild
Alias for @func{xmlNewChild}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-text
@findex xmlNewDocText
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocText}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-text
@findex xmlNewText
Alias for @func{xmlNewText}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-pi
@findex xmlNewDocPI
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocPI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-pi
@findex xmlNewPI
Alias for @func{xmlNewPI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-text-len
@findex xmlNewDocTextLen
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocTextLen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-text-len
@findex xmlNewTextLen
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextLen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-comment
@findex xmlNewDocComment
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocComment}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-comment
@findex xmlNewComment
Alias for @func{xmlNewComment}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-cdata-block
@findex xmlNewCDataBlock
Alias for @func{xmlNewCDataBlock}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-char-ref
@findex xmlNewCharRef
Alias for @func{xmlNewCharRef}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-reference
@findex xmlNewReference
Alias for @func{xmlNewReference}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-node
@findex xmlCopyNode
Alias for @func{xmlCopyNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-copy-node
@findex xmlDocCopyNode
Alias for @func{xmlDocCopyNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-copy-node-list
@findex xmlDocCopyNodeList
Alias for @func{xmlDocCopyNodeList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-node-list
@findex xmlCopyNodeList
Alias for @func{xmlCopyNodeList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-text-child
@findex xmlNewTextChild
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextChild}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-raw-node
@findex xmlNewDocRawNode
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocRawNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-fragment
@findex xmlNewDocFragment
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocFragment}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-line-no
@findex xmlGetLineNo
Alias for @func{xmlGetLineNo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-node-path
@findex xmlGetNodePath
Alias for @func{xmlGetNodePath}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-get-root-element
@findex xmlDocGetRootElement
Alias for @func{xmlDocGetRootElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-last-child
@findex xmlGetLastChild
Alias for @func{xmlGetLastChild}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-is-text
@findex xmlNodeIsText
Alias for @func{xmlNodeIsText}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-blank-node
@findex xmlIsBlankNode
Alias for @func{xmlIsBlankNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-set-root-element
@findex xmlDocSetRootElement
Alias for @func{xmlDocSetRootElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-set-name
@findex xmlNodeSetName
Alias for @func{xmlNodeSetName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-child
@findex xmlAddChild
Alias for @func{xmlAddChild}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-child-list
@findex xmlAddChildList
Alias for @func{xmlAddChildList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-replace-node
@findex xmlReplaceNode
Alias for @func{xmlReplaceNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-prev-sibling
@findex xmlAddPrevSibling
Alias for @func{xmlAddPrevSibling}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-sibling
@findex xmlAddSibling
Alias for @func{xmlAddSibling}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-next-sibling
@findex xmlAddNextSibling
Alias for @func{xmlAddNextSibling}.
@end defun


@defun xml-unlink-node
@findex xmlUnlinkNode
Alias for @func{xmlUnlinkNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-merge
@findex xmlTextMerge
Alias for @func{xmlTextMerge}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-concat
@findex xmlTextConcat
Alias for @func{xmlTextConcat}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-node-list
@findex xmlFreeNodeList
Alias for @func{xmlFreeNodeList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-node
@findex xmlFreeNode
Alias for @func{xmlFreeNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-tree-doc
@findex xmlSetTreeDoc
Alias for @func{xmlSetTreeDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-list-doc
@findex xmlSetListDoc
Alias for @func{xmlSetListDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-search-ns
@findex xmlSearchNs
Alias for @func{xmlSearchNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-search-ns-by-href
@findex xmlSearchNsByHref
Alias for @func{xmlSearchNsByHref}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-ns-list
@findex xmlGetNsList
Alias for @func{xmlGetNsList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-ns
@findex xmlSetNs
Alias for @func{xmlSetNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-namespace
@findex xmlCopyNamespace
Alias for @func{xmlCopyNamespace}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-namespace-list
@findex xmlCopyNamespaceList
Alias for @func{xmlCopyNamespaceList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-prop
@findex xmlSetProp
Alias for @func{xmlSetProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-ns-prop
@findex xmlSetNsProp
Alias for @func{xmlSetNsProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-no-ns-prop
@findex xmlGetNoNsProp
Alias for @func{xmlGetNoNsProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-prop
@findex xmlGetProp
Alias for @func{xmlGetProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-has-prop
@findex xmlHasProp
Alias for @func{xmlHasProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-has-ns-prop
@findex xmlHasNsProp
Alias for @func{xmlHasNsProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-ns-prop
@findex xmlGetNsProp
Alias for @func{xmlGetNsProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-string-get-node-list
@findex xmlStringGetNodeList
Alias for @func{xmlStringGetNodeList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-string-len-get-node-list
@findex xmlStringLenGetNodeList
Alias for @func{xmlStringLenGetNodeList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-list-get-string
@findex xmlNodeListGetString
Alias for @func{xmlNodeListGetString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-list-get-raw-string
@findex xmlNodeListGetRawString
Alias for @func{xmlNodeListGetRawString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-set-content
@findex xmlNodeSetContent
Alias for @func{xmlNodeSetContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-set-content-len
@findex xmlNodeSetContentLen
Alias for @func{xmlNodeSetContentLen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-add-content
@findex xmlNodeAddContent
Alias for @func{xmlNodeAddContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-add-content-len
@findex xmlNodeAddContentLen
Alias for @func{xmlNodeAddContentLen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-get-content
@findex xmlNodeGetContent
Alias for @func{xmlNodeGetContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-buf-get-content
@findex xmlNodeBufGetContent
Alias for @func{xmlNodeBufGetContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-get-lang
@findex xmlNodeGetLang
Alias for @func{xmlNodeGetLang}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-get-space-preserve
@findex xmlNodeGetSpacePreserve
Alias for @func{xmlNodeGetSpacePreserve}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-set-lang
@findex xmlNodeSetLang
Alias for @func{xmlNodeSetLang}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-set-space-preserve
@findex xmlNodeSetSpacePreserve
Alias for @func{xmlNodeSetSpacePreserve}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-get-base
@findex xmlNodeGetBase
Alias for @func{xmlNodeGetBase}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-set-base
@findex xmlNodeSetBase
Alias for @func{xmlNodeSetBase}.
@end defun


@defun xml-remove-prop
@findex xmlRemoveProp
Alias for @func{xmlRemoveProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-unset-ns-prop
@findex xmlUnsetNsProp
Alias for @func{xmlUnsetNsProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-unset-prop
@findex xmlUnsetProp
Alias for @func{xmlUnsetProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-write-CHAR
@findex xmlBufferWriteCHAR
Alias for @func{xmlBufferWriteCHAR}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-write-char
@findex xmlBufferWriteChar
Alias for @func{xmlBufferWriteChar}.
@end defun


@defun xml-buffer-write-quoted-string
@findex xmlBufferWriteQuotedString
Alias for @func{xmlBufferWriteQuotedString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-ptr
@findex xmlDocPtr
Alias for @func{xmlDocPtr}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reconciliate-ns
@findex xmlReconciliateNs
Alias for @func{xmlReconciliateNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-dump-format-memory
@findex xmlDocDumpFormatMemory
Alias for @func{xmlDocDumpFormatMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-dump-memory
@findex xmlDocDumpMemory
Alias for @func{xmlDocDumpMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-dump-memory-enc
@findex xmlDocDumpMemoryEnc
Alias for @func{xmlDocDumpMemoryEnc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-dump-format-memory-enc
@findex xmlDocDumpFormatMemoryEnc
Alias for @func{xmlDocDumpFormatMemoryEnc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-format-dump
@findex xmlDocFormatDump
Alias for @func{xmlDocFormatDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-doc-dump
@findex xmlDocDump
Alias for @func{xmlDocDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-elem-dump
@findex xmlElemDump
Alias for @func{xmlElemDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-file
@findex xmlSaveFile
Alias for @func{xmlSaveFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-format-file
@findex xmlSaveFormatFile
Alias for @func{xmlSaveFormatFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-dump
@findex xmlNodeDump
Alias for @func{xmlNodeDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-file-to
@findex xmlSaveFileTo
Alias for @func{xmlSaveFileTo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-format-file-to
@findex xmlSaveFormatFileTo
Alias for @func{xmlSaveFormatFileTo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-node-dump-output
@findex xmlNodeDumpOutput
Alias for @func{xmlNodeDumpOutput}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-format-file-enc
@findex xmlSaveFormatFileEnc
Alias for @func{xmlSaveFormatFileEnc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-file-enc
@findex xmlSaveFileEnc
Alias for @func{xmlSaveFileEnc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-xhtml
@findex xmlIsXHTML
Alias for @func{xmlIsXHTML}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-doc-compress-mode
@findex xmlGetDocCompressMode
Alias for @func{xmlGetDocCompressMode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-doc-compress-mode
@findex xmlSetDocCompressMode
Alias for @func{xmlSetDocCompressMode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-compress-mode
@findex xmlGetCompressMode
Alias for @func{xmlGetCompressMode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-compress-mode
@findex xmlSetCompressMode
Alias for @func{xmlSetCompressMode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dom-wrap-new-ctxt
@findex xmlDOMWrapNewCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlDOMWrapNewCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dom-wrap-free-ctxt
@findex xmlDOMWrapFreeCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlDOMWrapFreeCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dom-wrap-reconcile-namespaces
@findex xmlDOMWrapReconcileNamespaces
Alias for @func{xmlDOMWrapReconcileNamespaces}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dom-wrap-adopt-node
@findex xmlDOMWrapAdoptNode
Alias for @func{xmlDOMWrapAdoptNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dom-wrap-remove-node
@findex xmlDOMWrapRemoveNode
Alias for @func{xmlDOMWrapRemoveNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dom-wrap-clone-node
@findex xmlDOMWrapCloneNode
Alias for @func{xmlDOMWrapCloneNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-child-element-count
@findex xmlChildElementCount
Alias for @func{xmlChildElementCount}.
@end defun


@defun xml-next-element-sibling
@findex xmlNextElementSibling
Alias for @func{xmlNextElementSibling}.
@end defun


@defun xml-first-element-child
@findex xmlFirstElementChild
Alias for @func{xmlFirstElementChild}.
@end defun


@defun xml-last-element-child
@findex xmlLastElementChild
Alias for @func{xmlLastElementChild}.
@end defun


@defun xml-previous-element-sibling
@findex xmlPreviousElementSibling
Alias for @func{xmlPreviousElementSibling}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Library of generic @acronym{URI} related routines

@defun xml-create-uri
@findex xmlCreateURI
Alias for @func{xmlCreateURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-build-uri
@findex xmlBuildURI
Alias for @func{xmlBuildURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-build-relative-uri
@findex xmlBuildRelativeURI
Alias for @func{xmlBuildRelativeURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-uri
@findex xmlParseURI
Alias for @func{xmlParseURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-uri-raw
@findex xmlParseURIRaw
Alias for @func{xmlParseURIRaw}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parse-uri-reference
@findex xmlParseURIReference
Alias for @func{xmlParseURIReference}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-uri
@findex xmlSaveUri
Alias for @func{xmlSaveUri}.
@end defun


@defun xml-print-uri
@findex xmlPrintURI
Alias for @func{xmlPrintURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-uri-escape-str
@findex xmlURIEscapeStr
Alias for @func{xmlURIEscapeStr}.
@end defun


@defun xml-uri-unescape-string
@findex xmlURIUnescapeString
Alias for @func{xmlURIUnescapeString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-normalize-uri-path
@findex xmlNormalizeURIPath
Alias for @func{xmlNormalizeURIPath}.
@end defun


@defun xml-uri-escape
@findex xmlURIEscape
Alias for @func{xmlURIEscape}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-uri
@findex xmlFreeURI
Alias for @func{xmlFreeURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-canonic-path
@findex xmlCanonicPath
Alias for @func{xmlCanonicPath}.
@end defun


@defun xml-path-to-uri
@findex xmlPathToURI
Alias for @func{xmlPathToURI}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The @acronym{DTD} validation

@defun xml-add-notation-decl
@findex xmlAddNotationDecl
Alias for @func{xmlAddNotationDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-notation-table
@findex xmlCopyNotationTable
Alias for @func{xmlCopyNotationTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-notation-table
@findex xmlFreeNotationTable
Alias for @func{xmlFreeNotationTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dump-notation-decl
@findex xmlDumpNotationDecl
Alias for @func{xmlDumpNotationDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dump-notation-table
@findex xmlDumpNotationTable
Alias for @func{xmlDumpNotationTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-element-content
@findex xmlNewElementContent
Alias for @func{xmlNewElementContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-element-content
@findex xmlCopyElementContent
Alias for @func{xmlCopyElementContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-element-content
@findex xmlFreeElementContent
Alias for @func{xmlFreeElementContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-doc-element-content
@findex xmlNewDocElementContent
Alias for @func{xmlNewDocElementContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-doc-element-content
@findex xmlCopyDocElementContent
Alias for @func{xmlCopyDocElementContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-doc-element-content
@findex xmlFreeDocElementContent
Alias for @func{xmlFreeDocElementContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-snprintf-element-content
@findex xmlSnprintfElementContent
Alias for @func{xmlSnprintfElementContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-sprintf-element-content
@findex xmlSprintfElementContent
Alias for @func{xmlSprintfElementContent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-element-decl
@findex xmlAddElementDecl
Alias for @func{xmlAddElementDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-element-table
@findex xmlCopyElementTable
Alias for @func{xmlCopyElementTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-element-table
@findex xmlFreeElementTable
Alias for @func{xmlFreeElementTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dump-element-table
@findex xmlDumpElementTable
Alias for @func{xmlDumpElementTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dump-element-decl
@findex xmlDumpElementDecl
Alias for @func{xmlDumpElementDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-create-enumeration
@findex xmlCreateEnumeration
Alias for @func{xmlCreateEnumeration}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-enumeration
@findex xmlFreeEnumeration
Alias for @func{xmlFreeEnumeration}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-enumeration
@findex xmlCopyEnumeration
Alias for @func{xmlCopyEnumeration}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-attribute-decl
@findex xmlAddAttributeDecl
Alias for @func{xmlAddAttributeDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-attribute-table
@findex xmlCopyAttributeTable
Alias for @func{xmlCopyAttributeTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-attribute-table
@findex xmlFreeAttributeTable
Alias for @func{xmlFreeAttributeTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dump-attribute-table
@findex xmlDumpAttributeTable
Alias for @func{xmlDumpAttributeTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-dump-attribute-decl
@findex xmlDumpAttributeDecl
Alias for @func{xmlDumpAttributeDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-id
@findex xmlAddID
Alias for @func{xmlAddID}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-id-table
@findex xmlFreeIDTable
Alias for @func{xmlFreeIDTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-id
@findex xmlGetID
Alias for @func{xmlGetID}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-id
@findex xmlIsID
Alias for @func{xmlIsID}.
@end defun


@defun xml-remove-id
@findex xmlRemoveID
Alias for @func{xmlRemoveID}.
@end defun


@defun xml-add-ref
@findex xmlAddRef
Alias for @func{xmlAddRef}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-ref-table
@findex xmlFreeRefTable
Alias for @func{xmlFreeRefTable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-ref
@findex xmlIsRef
Alias for @func{xmlIsRef}.
@end defun


@defun xml-remove-ref
@findex xmlRemoveRef
Alias for @func{xmlRemoveRef}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-refs
@findex xmlGetRefs
Alias for @func{xmlGetRefs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-valid-ctxt
@findex xmlNewValidCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlNewValidCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-valid-ctxt
@findex xmlFreeValidCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlFreeValidCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-root
@findex xmlValidateRoot
Alias for @func{xmlValidateRoot}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-element-decl
@findex xmlValidateElementDecl
Alias for @func{xmlValidateElementDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-valid-normalize-attribute-value
@findex xmlValidNormalizeAttributeValue
Alias for @func{xmlValidNormalizeAttributeValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-valid-ctxt-normalize-attribute-value
@findex xmlValidCtxtNormalizeAttributeValue
Alias for @func{xmlValidCtxtNormalizeAttributeValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-attribute-decl
@findex xmlValidateAttributeDecl
Alias for @func{xmlValidateAttributeDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-attribute-value
@findex xmlValidateAttributeValue
Alias for @func{xmlValidateAttributeValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-notation-decl
@findex xmlValidateNotationDecl
Alias for @func{xmlValidateNotationDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-dtd
@findex xmlValidateDtd
Alias for @func{xmlValidateDtd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-dtd-final
@findex xmlValidateDtdFinal
Alias for @func{xmlValidateDtdFinal}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-document
@findex xmlValidateDocument
Alias for @func{xmlValidateDocument}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-element
@findex xmlValidateElement
Alias for @func{xmlValidateElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-one-element
@findex xmlValidateOneElement
Alias for @func{xmlValidateOneElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-one-attribute
@findex xmlValidateOneAttribute
Alias for @func{xmlValidateOneAttribute}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-one-namespace
@findex xmlValidateOneNamespace
Alias for @func{xmlValidateOneNamespace}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-document-final
@findex xmlValidateDocumentFinal
Alias for @func{xmlValidateDocumentFinal}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-notation-use
@findex xmlValidateNotationUse
Alias for @func{xmlValidateNotationUse}.
@end defun


@defun xml-is-mixed-element
@findex xmlIsMixedElement
Alias for @func{xmlIsMixedElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-dtd-attr-desc
@findex xmlGetDtdAttrDesc
Alias for @func{xmlGetDtdAttrDesc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-dtd-qattr-desc
@findex xmlGetDtdQAttrDesc
Alias for @func{xmlGetDtdQAttrDesc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-dtd-notation-desc
@findex xmlGetDtdNotationDesc
Alias for @func{xmlGetDtdNotationDesc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-dtd-qelement-desc
@findex xmlGetDtdQElementDesc
Alias for @func{xmlGetDtdQElementDesc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-dtd-element-desc
@findex xmlGetDtdElementDesc
Alias for @func{xmlGetDtdElementDesc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-valid-get-potential-children
@findex xmlValidGetPotentialChildren
Alias for @func{xmlValidGetPotentialChildren}.
@end defun


@defun xml-valid-get-valid-elements
@findex xmlValidGetValidElements
Alias for @func{xmlValidGetValidElements}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-name-value
@findex xmlValidateNameValue
Alias for @func{xmlValidateNameValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-names-value
@findex xmlValidateNamesValue
Alias for @func{xmlValidateNamesValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-nmtoken-value
@findex xmlValidateNmtokenValue
Alias for @func{xmlValidateNmtokenValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-nmtokens-value
@findex xmlValidateNmtokensValue
Alias for @func{xmlValidateNmtokensValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-valid-build-content-model
@findex xmlValidBuildContentModel
Alias for @func{xmlValidBuildContentModel}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-push-element
@findex xmlValidatePushElement
Alias for @func{xmlValidatePushElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-push-cdata
@findex xmlValidatePushCData
Alias for @func{xmlValidatePushCData}.
@end defun


@defun xml-validate-pop-element
@findex xmlValidatePopElement
Alias for @func{xmlValidatePopElement}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Implementation of XInclude

@defun xml-xinclude-process
@findex xmlXIncludeProcess
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeProcess}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xinclude-process-flags
@findex xmlXIncludeProcessFlags
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeProcessFlags}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xinclude-process-flags-data
@findex xmlXIncludeProcessFlagsData
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeProcessFlagsData}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xinclude-process-tree-flags-data
@findex xmlXIncludeProcessTreeFlagsData
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeProcessTreeFlagsData}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xinclude-process-tree
@findex xmlXIncludeProcessTree
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeProcessTree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xinclude-process-tree-flags
@findex xmlXIncludeProcessTreeFlags
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeProcessTreeFlags}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xinclude-new-context
@findex xmlXIncludeNewContext
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeNewContext}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xinclude-set-flags
@findex xmlXIncludeSetFlags
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeSetFlags}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xinclude-free-context
@findex xmlXIncludeFreeContext
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeFreeContext}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xinclude-process-node
@findex xmlXIncludeProcessNode
Alias for @func{xmlXIncludeProcessNode}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @api{} to build regexp automata

@defun xml-new-automata
@findex xmlNewAutomata
Alias for @func{xmlNewAutomata}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-automata
@findex xmlFreeAutomata
Alias for @func{xmlFreeAutomata}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-get-init-state
@findex xmlAutomataGetInitState
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataGetInitState}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-set-final-state
@findex xmlAutomataSetFinalState
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataSetFinalState}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-state
@findex xmlAutomataNewState
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewState}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-transition
@findex xmlAutomataNewTransition
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewTransition}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-transition2
@findex xmlAutomataNewTransition2
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewTransition2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-neg-trans
@findex xmlAutomataNewNegTrans
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewNegTrans}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-count-trans
@findex xmlAutomataNewCountTrans
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewCountTrans}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-count-trans2
@findex xmlAutomataNewCountTrans2
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewCountTrans2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-once-trans
@findex xmlAutomataNewOnceTrans
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewOnceTrans}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-once-trans2
@findex xmlAutomataNewOnceTrans2
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewOnceTrans2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-all-trans
@findex xmlAutomataNewAllTrans
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewAllTrans}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-epsilon
@findex xmlAutomataNewEpsilon
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewEpsilon}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-counted-trans
@findex xmlAutomataNewCountedTrans
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewCountedTrans}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-counter-trans
@findex xmlAutomataNewCounterTrans
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewCounterTrans}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-new-counter
@findex xmlAutomataNewCounter
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataNewCounter}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-compile
@findex xmlAutomataCompile
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataCompile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-automata-is-determinist
@findex xmlAutomataIsDeterminist
Alias for @func{xmlAutomataIsDeterminist}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Error handling

@defun xml-set-generic-error-func
@findex xmlSetGenericErrorFunc
Alias for @func{xmlSetGenericErrorFunc}.
@end defun


@defun init-generic-error-default-func
@findex initGenericErrorDefaultFunc
Alias for @func{initGenericErrorDefaultFunc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-set-structured-error-func
@findex xmlSetStructuredErrorFunc
Alias for @func{xmlSetStructuredErrorFunc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-print-file-info
@findex xmlParserPrintFileInfo
Alias for @func{xmlParserPrintFileInfo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-print-file-context
@findex xmlParserPrintFileContext
Alias for @func{xmlParserPrintFileContext}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-last-error
@findex xmlGetLastError
Alias for @func{xmlGetLastError}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reset-last-error
@findex xmlResetLastError
Alias for @func{xmlResetLastError}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-get-last-error
@findex xmlCtxtGetLastError
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtGetLastError}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ctxt-reset-last-error
@findex xmlCtxtResetLastError
Alias for @func{xmlCtxtResetLastError}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reset-error
@findex xmlResetError
Alias for @func{xmlResetError}.
@end defun


@defun xml-copy-error
@findex xmlCopyError
Alias for @func{xmlCopyError}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Interface for the I/O interfaces used by the parser

@defun xml-cleanup-input-callbacks
@findex xmlCleanupInputCallbacks
Alias for @func{xmlCleanupInputCallbacks}.
@end defun


@defun xml-pop-input-callbacks
@findex xmlPopInputCallbacks
Alias for @func{xmlPopInputCallbacks}.
@end defun


@defun xml-register-default-input-callbacks
@findex xmlRegisterDefaultInputCallbacks
Alias for @func{xmlRegisterDefaultInputCallbacks}.
@end defun


@defun xml-alloc-parser-input-buffer
@findex xmlAllocParserInputBuffer
Alias for @func{xmlAllocParserInputBuffer}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-create-filename
@findex xmlParserInputBufferCreateFilename
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferCreateFilename}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-create-file
@findex xmlParserInputBufferCreateFile
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferCreateFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-create-fd
@findex xmlParserInputBufferCreateFd
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferCreateFd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-create-mem
@findex xmlParserInputBufferCreateMem
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferCreateMem}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-create-static
@findex xmlParserInputBufferCreateStatic
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferCreateStatic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-create-io
@findex xmlParserInputBufferCreateIO
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferCreateIO}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-read
@findex xmlParserInputBufferRead
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferRead}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-grow
@findex xmlParserInputBufferGrow
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferGrow}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-input-buffer-push
@findex xmlParserInputBufferPush
Alias for @func{xmlParserInputBufferPush}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-parser-input-buffer
@findex xmlFreeParserInputBuffer
Alias for @func{xmlFreeParserInputBuffer}.
@end defun


@defun xml-parser-get-directory
@findex xmlParserGetDirectory
Alias for @func{xmlParserGetDirectory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-register-input-callbacks
@findex xmlRegisterInputCallbacks
Alias for @func{xmlRegisterInputCallbacks}.
@end defun


@defun __xml-parser-input-buffer-create-filename
@findex __xmlParserInputBufferCreateFilename
Alias for @func{__xmlParserInputBufferCreateFilename}.
@end defun


@defun xml-cleanup-output-callbacks
@findex xmlCleanupOutputCallbacks
Alias for @func{xmlCleanupOutputCallbacks}.
@end defun


@defun xml-register-default-output-callbacks
@findex xmlRegisterDefaultOutputCallbacks
Alias for @func{xmlRegisterDefaultOutputCallbacks}.
@end defun


@defun xml-alloc-output-buffer
@findex xmlAllocOutputBuffer
Alias for @func{xmlAllocOutputBuffer}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-create-filename
@findex xmlOutputBufferCreateFilename
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferCreateFilename}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-create-file
@findex xmlOutputBufferCreateFile
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferCreateFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-create-buffer
@findex xmlOutputBufferCreateBuffer
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferCreateBuffer}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-create-fd
@findex xmlOutputBufferCreateFd
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferCreateFd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-create-io
@findex xmlOutputBufferCreateIO
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferCreateIO}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-write
@findex xmlOutputBufferWrite
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferWrite}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-write-string
@findex xmlOutputBufferWriteString
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferWriteString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-write-escape
@findex xmlOutputBufferWriteEscape
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferWriteEscape}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-flush
@findex xmlOutputBufferFlush
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferFlush}.
@end defun


@defun xml-output-buffer-close
@findex xmlOutputBufferClose
Alias for @func{xmlOutputBufferClose}.
@end defun


@defun xml-register-output-callbacks
@findex xmlRegisterOutputCallbacks
Alias for @func{xmlRegisterOutputCallbacks}.
@end defun


@defun __xml-output-buffer-create-filename
@findex __xmlOutputBufferCreateFilename
Alias for @func{__xmlOutputBufferCreateFilename}.
@end defun


@defun xml-register-http-post-callbacks
@findex xmlRegisterHTTPPostCallbacks
Alias for @func{xmlRegisterHTTPPostCallbacks}.
@end defun


@defun xml-check-http-input
@findex xmlCheckHTTPInput
Alias for @func{xmlCheckHTTPInput}.
@end defun


@defun xml-no-net-external-entity-loader
@findex xmlNoNetExternalEntityLoader
Alias for @func{xmlNoNetExternalEntityLoader}.
@end defun


@defun xml-normalize-windows-path
@findex xmlNormalizeWindowsPath
Alias for @func{xmlNormalizeWindowsPath}.
@end defun


@defun xml-check-filename
@findex xmlCheckFilename
Alias for @func{xmlCheckFilename}.
@end defun


@defun xml-file-match
@findex xmlFileMatch
Alias for @func{xmlFileMatch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-file-open
@findex xmlFileOpen
Alias for @func{xmlFileOpen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-file-read
@findex xmlFileRead
Alias for @func{xmlFileRead}.
@end defun


@defun xml-file-close
@findex xmlFileClose
Alias for @func{xmlFileClose}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-http-match
@findex xmlIOHTTPMatch
Alias for @func{xmlIOHTTPMatch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-http-open
@findex xmlIOHTTPOpen
Alias for @func{xmlIOHTTPOpen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-http-open-w
@findex xmlIOHTTPOpenW
Alias for @func{xmlIOHTTPOpenW}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-http-read
@findex xmlIOHTTPRead
Alias for @func{xmlIOHTTPRead}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-http-close
@findex xmlIOHTTPClose
Alias for @func{xmlIOHTTPClose}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-ftp-match
@findex xmlIOFTPMatch
Alias for @func{xmlIOFTPMatch}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-ftp-open
@findex xmlIOFTPOpen
Alias for @func{xmlIOFTPOpen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-ftp-read
@findex xmlIOFTPRead
Alias for @func{xmlIOFTPRead}.
@end defun


@defun xml-io-ftp-close
@findex xmlIOFTPClose
Alias for @func{xmlIOFTPClose}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Interface for the memory allocator

@defun xml-mem-setup
@findex xmlMemSetup
Alias for @func{xmlMemSetup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-get
@findex xmlMemGet
Alias for @func{xmlMemGet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-gc-mem-setup
@findex xmlGcMemSetup
Alias for @func{xmlGcMemSetup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-gc-mem-get
@findex xmlGcMemGet
Alias for @func{xmlGcMemGet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-init-memory
@findex xmlInitMemory
Alias for @func{xmlInitMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-cleanup-memory
@findex xmlCleanupMemory
Alias for @func{xmlCleanupMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-used
@findex xmlMemUsed
Alias for @func{xmlMemUsed}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-blocks
@findex xmlMemBlocks
Alias for @func{xmlMemBlocks}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-display
@findex xmlMemDisplay
Alias for @func{xmlMemDisplay}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-display-last
@findex xmlMemDisplayLast
Alias for @func{xmlMemDisplayLast}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-show
@findex xmlMemShow
Alias for @func{xmlMemShow}.
@end defun


@defun xml-memory-dump
@findex xmlMemoryDump
Alias for @func{xmlMemoryDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-malloc
@findex xmlMemMalloc
Alias for @func{xmlMemMalloc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-realloc
@findex xmlMemRealloc
Alias for @func{xmlMemRealloc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-free
@findex xmlMemFree
Alias for @func{xmlMemFree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-memory-strdup
@findex xmlMemoryStrdup
Alias for @func{xmlMemoryStrdup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-malloc-loc
@findex xmlMallocLoc
Alias for @func{xmlMallocLoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-realloc-loc
@findex xmlReallocLoc
Alias for @func{xmlReallocLoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-malloc-atomic-loc
@findex xmlMallocAtomicLoc
Alias for @func{xmlMallocAtomicLoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-mem-strdup-loc
@findex xmlMemStrdupLoc
Alias for @func{xmlMemStrdupLoc}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Dynamic module loading

@defun xml-module-open
@findex xmlModuleOpen
Alias for @func{xmlModuleOpen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-module-symbol
@findex xmlModuleSymbol
Alias for @func{xmlModuleSymbol}.
@end defun


@defun xml-module-close
@findex xmlModuleClose
Alias for @func{xmlModuleClose}.
@end defun


@defun xml-module-free
@findex xmlModuleFree
Alias for @func{xmlModuleFree}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The XMLReader implementation

@defun xml-new-text-reader
@findex xmlNewTextReader
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextReader}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-text-reader-filename
@findex xmlNewTextReaderFilename
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextReaderFilename}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-text-reader
@findex xmlFreeTextReader
Alias for @func{xmlFreeTextReader}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-setup
@findex xmlTextReaderSetup
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderSetup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-read
@findex xmlTextReaderRead
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderRead}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-read-inner-xml
@findex xmlTextReaderReadInnerXml
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderReadInnerXml}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-read-outer-xml
@findex xmlTextReaderReadOuterXml
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderReadOuterXml}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-read-string
@findex xmlTextReaderReadString
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderReadString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-read-attribute-value
@findex xmlTextReaderReadAttributeValue
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderReadAttributeValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-attribute-count
@findex xmlTextReaderAttributeCount
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderAttributeCount}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-depth
@findex xmlTextReaderDepth
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderDepth}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-has-attributes
@findex xmlTextReaderHasAttributes
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderHasAttributes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-has-value
@findex xmlTextReaderHasValue
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderHasValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-is-default
@findex xmlTextReaderIsDefault
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderIsDefault}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-is-empty-element
@findex xmlTextReaderIsEmptyElement
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderIsEmptyElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-node-type
@findex xmlTextReaderNodeType
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderNodeType}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-quote-char
@findex xmlTextReaderQuoteChar
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderQuoteChar}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-read-state
@findex xmlTextReaderReadState
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderReadState}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-is-namespace-decl
@findex xmlTextReaderIsNamespaceDecl
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderIsNamespaceDecl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-base-uri
@findex xmlTextReaderConstBaseUri
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstBaseUri}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-local-name
@findex xmlTextReaderConstLocalName
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstLocalName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-name
@findex xmlTextReaderConstName
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-namespace-uri
@findex xmlTextReaderConstNamespaceUri
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstNamespaceUri}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-prefix
@findex xmlTextReaderConstPrefix
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstPrefix}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-xml-lang
@findex xmlTextReaderConstXmlLang
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstXmlLang}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-string
@findex xmlTextReaderConstString
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-value
@findex xmlTextReaderConstValue
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-base-uri
@findex xmlTextReaderBaseUri
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderBaseUri}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-local-name
@findex xmlTextReaderLocalName
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderLocalName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-name
@findex xmlTextReaderName
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderName}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-namespace-uri
@findex xmlTextReaderNamespaceUri
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderNamespaceUri}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-prefix
@findex xmlTextReaderPrefix
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderPrefix}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-xml-lang
@findex xmlTextReaderXmlLang
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderXmlLang}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-value
@findex xmlTextReaderValue
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-close
@findex xmlTextReaderClose
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderClose}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-get-attribute-no
@findex xmlTextReaderGetAttributeNo
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderGetAttributeNo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-get-attribute
@findex xmlTextReaderGetAttribute
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderGetAttribute}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-get-attribute-ns
@findex xmlTextReaderGetAttributeNs
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderGetAttributeNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-get-remainder
@findex xmlTextReaderGetRemainder
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderGetRemainder}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-lookup-namespace
@findex xmlTextReaderLookupNamespace
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderLookupNamespace}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-move-to-attribute-no
@findex xmlTextReaderMoveToAttributeNo
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderMoveToAttributeNo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-move-to-attribute
@findex xmlTextReaderMoveToAttribute
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderMoveToAttribute}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-move-to-attribute-ns
@findex xmlTextReaderMoveToAttributeNs
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderMoveToAttributeNs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-move-to-first-attribute
@findex xmlTextReaderMoveToFirstAttribute
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderMoveToFirstAttribute}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-move-to-next-attribute
@findex xmlTextReaderMoveToNextAttribute
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderMoveToNextAttribute}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-move-to-element
@findex xmlTextReaderMoveToElement
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderMoveToElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-normalization
@findex xmlTextReaderNormalization
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderNormalization}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-encoding
@findex xmlTextReaderConstEncoding
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstEncoding}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-set-parser-prop
@findex xmlTextReaderSetParserProp
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderSetParserProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-get-parser-prop
@findex xmlTextReaderGetParserProp
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderGetParserProp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-current-node
@findex xmlTextReaderCurrentNode
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderCurrentNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-get-parser-line-number
@findex xmlTextReaderGetParserLineNumber
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderGetParserLineNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-get-parser-column-number
@findex xmlTextReaderGetParserColumnNumber
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderGetParserColumnNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-preserve
@findex xmlTextReaderPreserve
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderPreserve}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-preserve-pattern
@findex xmlTextReaderPreservePattern
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderPreservePattern}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-current-doc
@findex xmlTextReaderCurrentDoc
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderCurrentDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-expand
@findex xmlTextReaderExpand
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderExpand}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-next
@findex xmlTextReaderNext
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderNext}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-next-sibling
@findex xmlTextReaderNextSibling
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderNextSibling}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-is-valid
@findex xmlTextReaderIsValid
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderIsValid}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-relax-ng-validate
@findex xmlTextReaderRelaxNGValidate
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderRelaxNGValidate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-relax-ng-set-schema
@findex xmlTextReaderRelaxNGSetSchema
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderRelaxNGSetSchema}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-schema-validate
@findex xmlTextReaderSchemaValidate
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderSchemaValidate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-schema-validate-ctxt
@findex xmlTextReaderSchemaValidateCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderSchemaValidateCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-set-schema
@findex xmlTextReaderSetSchema
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderSetSchema}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-const-xml-version
@findex xmlTextReaderConstXmlVersion
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderConstXmlVersion}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-standalone
@findex xmlTextReaderStandalone
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderStandalone}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-byte-consumed
@findex xmlTextReaderByteConsumed
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderByteConsumed}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-walker
@findex xmlReaderWalker
Alias for @func{xmlReaderWalker}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-for-doc
@findex xmlReaderForDoc
Alias for @func{xmlReaderForDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-for-file
@findex xmlReaderForFile
Alias for @func{xmlReaderForFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-for-memory
@findex xmlReaderForMemory
Alias for @func{xmlReaderForMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-for-fd
@findex xmlReaderForFd
Alias for @func{xmlReaderForFd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-for-io
@findex xmlReaderForIO
Alias for @func{xmlReaderForIO}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-new-walker
@findex xmlReaderNewWalker
Alias for @func{xmlReaderNewWalker}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-new-doc
@findex xmlReaderNewDoc
Alias for @func{xmlReaderNewDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-new-file
@findex xmlReaderNewFile
Alias for @func{xmlReaderNewFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-new-memory
@findex xmlReaderNewMemory
Alias for @func{xmlReaderNewMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-new-fd
@findex xmlReaderNewFd
Alias for @func{xmlReaderNewFd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reader-new-io
@findex xmlReaderNewIO
Alias for @func{xmlReaderNewIO}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-locator-line-number
@findex xmlTextReaderLocatorLineNumber
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderLocatorLineNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-locator-base-uri
@findex xmlTextReaderLocatorBaseURI
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderLocatorBaseURI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-set-error-handler
@findex xmlTextReaderSetErrorHandler
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderSetErrorHandler}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-set-structured-error-handler
@findex xmlTextReaderSetStructuredErrorHandler
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderSetStructuredErrorHandler}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-reader-get-error-handler
@findex xmlTextReaderGetErrorHandler
Alias for @func{xmlTextReaderGetErrorHandler}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Regular expressions handling

@defun xml-regexp-compile
@findex xmlRegexpCompile
Alias for @func{xmlRegexpCompile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reg-free-regexp
@findex xmlRegFreeRegexp
Alias for @func{xmlRegFreeRegexp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-regexp-exec
@findex xmlRegexpExec
Alias for @func{xmlRegexpExec}.
@end defun


@defun xml-regexp-print
@findex xmlRegexpPrint
Alias for @func{xmlRegexpPrint}.
@end defun


@defun xml-regexp-is-determinist
@findex xmlRegexpIsDeterminist
Alias for @func{xmlRegexpIsDeterminist}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reg-new-exec-ctxt
@findex xmlRegNewExecCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlRegNewExecCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reg-free-exec-ctxt
@findex xmlRegFreeExecCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlRegFreeExecCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reg-exec-push-string
@findex xmlRegExecPushString
Alias for @func{xmlRegExecPushString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reg-exec-push-string2
@findex xmlRegExecPushString2
Alias for @func{xmlRegExecPushString2}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reg-exec-next-values
@findex xmlRegExecNextValues
Alias for @func{xmlRegExecNextValues}.
@end defun


@defun xml-reg-exec-err-info
@findex xmlRegExecErrInfo
Alias for @func{xmlRegExecErrInfo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-free-ctxt
@findex xmlExpFreeCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlExpFreeCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-new-ctxt
@findex xmlExpNewCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlExpNewCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-ctxt-nb-nodes
@findex xmlExpCtxtNbNodes
Alias for @func{xmlExpCtxtNbNodes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-ctxt-nb-cons
@findex xmlExpCtxtNbCons
Alias for @func{xmlExpCtxtNbCons}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-free
@findex xmlExpFree
Alias for @func{xmlExpFree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-ref
@findex xmlExpRef
Alias for @func{xmlExpRef}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-parse
@findex xmlExpParse
Alias for @func{xmlExpParse}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-new-atom
@findex xmlExpNewAtom
Alias for @func{xmlExpNewAtom}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-new-or
@findex xmlExpNewOr
Alias for @func{xmlExpNewOr}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-new-seq
@findex xmlExpNewSeq
Alias for @func{xmlExpNewSeq}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-new-range
@findex xmlExpNewRange
Alias for @func{xmlExpNewRange}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-is-nillable
@findex xmlExpIsNillable
Alias for @func{xmlExpIsNillable}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-max-token
@findex xmlExpMaxToken
Alias for @func{xmlExpMaxToken}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-get-language
@findex xmlExpGetLanguage
Alias for @func{xmlExpGetLanguage}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-get-start
@findex xmlExpGetStart
Alias for @func{xmlExpGetStart}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-string-derive
@findex xmlExpStringDerive
Alias for @func{xmlExpStringDerive}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-exp-derive
@findex xmlExpExpDerive
Alias for @func{xmlExpExpDerive}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-subsume
@findex xmlExpSubsume
Alias for @func{xmlExpSubsume}.
@end defun


@defun xml-exp-dump
@findex xmlExpDump
Alias for @func{xmlExpDump}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The @axml{} document serializer

@defun xml-save-to-fd
@findex xmlSaveToFd
Alias for @func{xmlSaveToFd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-to-filename
@findex xmlSaveToFilename
Alias for @func{xmlSaveToFilename}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-to-buffer
@findex xmlSaveToBuffer
Alias for @func{xmlSaveToBuffer}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-to-io
@findex xmlSaveToIO
Alias for @func{xmlSaveToIO}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-doc
@findex xmlSaveDoc
Alias for @func{xmlSaveDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-tree
@findex xmlSaveTree
Alias for @func{xmlSaveTree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-flush
@findex xmlSaveFlush
Alias for @func{xmlSaveFlush}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-close
@findex xmlSaveClose
Alias for @func{xmlSaveClose}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-set-escape
@findex xmlSaveSetEscape
Alias for @func{xmlSaveSetEscape}.
@end defun


@defun xml-save-set-attr-escape
@findex xmlSaveSetAttrEscape
Alias for @func{xmlSaveSetAttrEscape}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Internal interfaces for @axml{} Schemas

@defun xml-schema-free-type
@findex xmlSchemaFreeType
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaFreeType}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-free-wildcard
@findex xmlSchemaFreeWildcard
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaFreeWildcard}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Incomplete @axml{} Schemas structure implementation

@defun xml-schema-new-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlSchemaNewParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaNewParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-new-mem-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlSchemaNewMemParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaNewMemParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-new-doc-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlSchemaNewDocParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaNewDocParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-free-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlSchemaFreeParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaFreeParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-set-parser-errors
@findex xmlSchemaSetParserErrors
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaSetParserErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-set-parser-structured-errors
@findex xmlSchemaSetParserStructuredErrors
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaSetParserStructuredErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-get-parser-errors
@findex xmlSchemaGetParserErrors
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaGetParserErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-is-valid
@findex xmlSchemaIsValid
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaIsValid}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-parse
@findex xmlSchemaParse
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaParse}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-free
@findex xmlSchemaFree
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaFree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-dump
@findex xmlSchemaDump
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaDump}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-set-valid-errors
@findex xmlSchemaSetValidErrors
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaSetValidErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-set-valid-structured-errors
@findex xmlSchemaSetValidStructuredErrors
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaSetValidStructuredErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-get-valid-errors
@findex xmlSchemaGetValidErrors
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaGetValidErrors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-set-valid-options
@findex xmlSchemaSetValidOptions
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaSetValidOptions}.
@end defun


@defun xml-unvalid-ctxt-get-options
@findex xmlSchemaValidCtxtGetOptions
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidCtxtGetOptions}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-new-valid-ctxt
@findex xmlSchemaNewValidCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaNewValidCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-free-valid-ctxt
@findex xmlSchemaFreeValidCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaFreeValidCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-doc
@findex xmlSchemaValidateDoc
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidateDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-one-element
@findex xmlSchemaValidateOneElement
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidateOneElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-stream
@findex xmlSchemaValidateStream
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidateStream}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-file
@findex xmlSchemaValidateFile
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidateFile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-valid-ctxt-get-parser-ctxt
@findex xmlSchemaValidCtxtGetParserCtxt
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidCtxtGetParserCtxt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-sax-plug
@findex xmlSchemaSAXPlug
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaSAXPlug}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-sax-unplug
@findex xmlSchemaSAXUnplug
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaSAXUnplug}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Implementation of @axml{} Schema Datatypes

@defun xml-schema-init-types
@findex xmlSchemaInitTypes
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaInitTypes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-cleanup-types
@findex xmlSchemaCleanupTypes
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaCleanupTypes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-get-predefined-type
@findex xmlSchemaGetPredefinedType
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaGetPredefinedType}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-predefined-type
@findex xmlSchemaValidatePredefinedType
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidatePredefinedType}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-val-predef-type-node
@findex xmlSchemaValPredefTypeNode
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValPredefTypeNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-facet
@findex xmlSchemaValidateFacet
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidateFacet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-facet-whtsp
@findex xmlSchemaValidateFacetWhtsp
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidateFacetWhtsp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-free-value
@findex xmlSchemaFreeValue
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaFreeValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-new-facet
@findex xmlSchemaNewFacet
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaNewFacet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-check-facet
@findex xmlSchemaCheckFacet
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaCheckFacet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-free-facet
@findex xmlSchemaFreeFacet
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaFreeFacet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-compare-values
@findex xmlSchemaCompareValues
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaCompareValues}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-get-built-in-list-simple-type-item-Type
@findex xmlSchemaGetBuiltInListSimpleTypeItemType
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaGetBuiltInListSimpleTypeItemType}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-list-simple-type-facet
@findex xmlSchemaValidateListSimpleTypeFacet
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidateListSimpleTypeFacet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-get-built-in-type
@findex xmlSchemaGetBuiltInType
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaGetBuiltInType}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-is-built-in-type-facet
@findex xmlSchemaIsBuiltInTypeFacet
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaIsBuiltInTypeFacet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-collapse-string
@findex xmlSchemaCollapseString
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaCollapseString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-white-space-replace
@findex xmlSchemaWhiteSpaceReplace
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaWhiteSpaceReplace}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-get-facet-value-as-u-long
@findex xmlSchemaGetFacetValueAsULong
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaGetFacetValueAsULong}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-length-facet
@findex xmlSchemaValidateLengthFacet
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidateLengthFacet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-validate-length-facet-whtsp
@findex xmlSchemaValidateLengthFacetWhtsp
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValidateLengthFacetWhtsp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-val-predef-type-node-no-norm
@findex xmlSchemaValPredefTypeNodeNoNorm
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValPredefTypeNodeNoNorm}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-get-canon-value
@findex xmlSchemaGetCanonValue
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaGetCanonValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-get-canon-value-whtsp
@findex xmlSchemaGetCanonValueWhtsp
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaGetCanonValueWhtsp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-value-append
@findex xmlSchemaValueAppend
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValueAppend}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-value-get-next
@findex xmlSchemaValueGetNext
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValueGetNext}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-value-get-as-string
@findex xmlSchemaValueGetAsString
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValueGetAsString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-value-get-as-boolean
@findex xmlSchemaValueGetAsBoolean
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaValueGetAsBoolean}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-new-string-value
@findex xmlSchemaNewStringValue
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaNewStringValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-new-notation-value
@findex xmlSchemaNewNOTATIONValue
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaNewNOTATIONValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-new-qname-value
@findex xmlSchemaNewQNameValue
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaNewQNameValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-compare-values-whtsp
@findex xmlSchemaCompareValuesWhtsp
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaCompareValuesWhtsp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-copy-value
@findex xmlSchemaCopyValue
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaCopyValue}.
@end defun


@defun xml-schema-get-val-type
@findex xmlSchemaGetValType
Alias for @func{xmlSchemaGetValType}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Set of routines to process strings

@defun xml-strdup
@findex xmlStrdup
Alias for @func{xmlStrdup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strndup
@findex xmlStrndup
Alias for @func{xmlStrndup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-char-strndup
@findex xmlCharStrndup
Alias for @func{xmlCharStrndup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-char-strdup
@findex xmlCharStrdup
Alias for @func{xmlCharStrdup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strsub
@findex xmlStrsub
Alias for @func{xmlStrsub}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strchr
@findex xmlStrchr
Alias for @func{xmlStrchr}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strstr
@findex xmlStrstr
Alias for @func{xmlStrstr}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strcasestr
@findex xmlStrcasestr
Alias for @func{xmlStrcasestr}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strcmp
@findex xmlStrcmp
Alias for @func{xmlStrcmp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strncmp
@findex xmlStrncmp
Alias for @func{xmlStrncmp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strcasecmp
@findex xmlStrcasecmp
Alias for @func{xmlStrcasecmp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strncasecmp
@findex xmlStrncasecmp
Alias for @func{xmlStrncasecmp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-str-equal
@findex xmlStrEqual
Alias for @func{xmlStrEqual}.
@end defun


@defun xml-str-qequal
@findex xmlStrQEqual
Alias for @func{xmlStrQEqual}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strlen
@findex xmlStrlen
Alias for @func{xmlStrlen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strcat
@findex xmlStrcat
Alias for @func{xmlStrcat}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strncat
@findex xmlStrncat
Alias for @func{xmlStrncat}.
@end defun


@defun xml-strncat-new
@findex xmlStrncatNew
Alias for @func{xmlStrncatNew}.
@end defun


@defun xml-get-utf8-char
@findex xmlGetUTF8Char
Alias for @func{xmlGetUTF8Char}.
@end defun


@defun xml-check-utf8
@findex xmlCheckUTF8
Alias for @func{xmlCheckUTF8}.
@end defun


@defun xml-utf8-strsize
@findex xmlUTF8Strsize
Alias for @func{xmlUTF8Strsize}.
@end defun


@defun xml-utf8-strndup
@findex xmlUTF8Strndup
Alias for @func{xmlUTF8Strndup}.
@end defun


@defun xml-utf8-strpos
@findex xmlUTF8Strpos
Alias for @func{xmlUTF8Strpos}.
@end defun


@defun xml-utf8-strloc
@findex xmlUTF8Strloc
Alias for @func{xmlUTF8Strloc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-utf8-strsub
@findex xmlUTF8Strsub
Alias for @func{xmlUTF8Strsub}.
@end defun


@defun xml-utf8-strlen
@findex xmlUTF8Strlen
Alias for @func{xmlUTF8Strlen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-utf8-size
@findex xmlUTF8Size
Alias for @func{xmlUTF8Size}.
@end defun


@defun xml-utf8-charcmp
@findex xmlUTF8Charcmp
Alias for @func{xmlUTF8Charcmp}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Unicode character @api{}s

@defun xml-ucs-is-aegean-numbers
@findex xmlUCSIsAegeanNumbers
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsAegeanNumbers}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-alphabetic-presentation-forms
@findex xmlUCSIsAlphabeticPresentationForms
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsAlphabeticPresentationForms}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-arabic
@findex xmlUCSIsArabic
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsArabic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-arabic-presentation-forms-a
@findex xmlUCSIsArabicPresentationFormsA
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsArabicPresentationFormsA}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-arabic-presentation-forms-b
@findex xmlUCSIsArabicPresentationFormsB
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsArabicPresentationFormsB}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-armenian
@findex xmlUCSIsArmenian
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsArmenian}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-arrows
@findex xmlUCSIsArrows
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsArrows}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-basic-latin
@findex xmlUCSIsBasicLatin
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsBasicLatin}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-bengali
@findex xmlUCSIsBengali
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsBengali}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-block-elements
@findex xmlUCSIsBlockElements
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsBlockElements}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-bopomofo
@findex xmlUCSIsBopomofo
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsBopomofo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-bopomofo-extended
@findex xmlUCSIsBopomofoExtended
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsBopomofoExtended}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-box-drawing
@findex xmlUCSIsBoxDrawing
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsBoxDrawing}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-braille-patterns
@findex xmlUCSIsBraillePatterns
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsBraillePatterns}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-buhid
@findex xmlUCSIsBuhid
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsBuhid}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-byzantine-musical-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsByzantineMusicalSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsByzantineMusicalSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cjk-compatibility
@findex xmlUCSIsCJKCompatibility
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCJKCompatibility}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cjk-compatibility-forms
@findex xmlUCSIsCJKCompatibilityForms
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCJKCompatibilityForms}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cjk-compatibility-ideographs
@findex xmlUCSIsCJKCompatibilityIdeographs
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCJKCompatibilityIdeographs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cjk-compatibility-ideographs-supplement
@findex xmlUCSIsCJKCompatibilityIdeographsSupplement
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCJKCompatibilityIdeographsSupplement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cjk-radicals-supplement
@findex xmlUCSIsCJKRadicalsSupplement
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCJKRadicalsSupplement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cjk-symbolsand-punctuation
@findex xmlUCSIsCJKSymbolsandPunctuation
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCJKSymbolsandPunctuation}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cjk-unified-ideographs
@findex xmlUCSIsCJKUnifiedIdeographs
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCJKUnifiedIdeographs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cjk-unified-ideographs-extension-a
@findex xmlUCSIsCJKUnifiedIdeographsExtensionA
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCJKUnifiedIdeographsExtensionA}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cjk-unified-ideographs-extension-b
@findex xmlUCSIsCJKUnifiedIdeographsExtensionB
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCJKUnifiedIdeographsExtensionB}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cherokee
@findex xmlUCSIsCherokee
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCherokee}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-combining-diacritical-marks
@findex xmlUCSIsCombiningDiacriticalMarks
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCombiningDiacriticalMarks}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-combining-diacritical-marksfor-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsCombiningDiacriticalMarksforSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCombiningDiacriticalMarksforSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-combining-half-marks
@findex xmlUCSIsCombiningHalfMarks
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCombiningHalfMarks}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-combining-marksfor-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsCombiningMarksforSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCombiningMarksforSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-control-pictures
@findex xmlUCSIsControlPictures
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsControlPictures}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-currency-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsCurrencySymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCurrencySymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cypriot-syllabary
@findex xmlUCSIsCypriotSyllabary
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCypriotSyllabary}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cyrillic
@findex xmlUCSIsCyrillic
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCyrillic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cyrillic-supplement
@findex xmlUCSIsCyrillicSupplement
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCyrillicSupplement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-deseret
@findex xmlUCSIsDeseret
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsDeseret}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-devanagari
@findex xmlUCSIsDevanagari
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsDevanagari}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-dingbats
@findex xmlUCSIsDingbats
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsDingbats}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-enclosed-alphanumerics
@findex xmlUCSIsEnclosedAlphanumerics
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsEnclosedAlphanumerics}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-enclosed-cjk-lettersand-months
@findex xmlUCSIsEnclosedCJKLettersandMonths
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsEnclosedCJKLettersandMonths}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-ethiopic
@findex xmlUCSIsEthiopic
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsEthiopic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-general-punctuation
@findex xmlUCSIsGeneralPunctuation
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsGeneralPunctuation}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-geometric-shapes
@findex xmlUCSIsGeometricShapes
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsGeometricShapes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-georgian
@findex xmlUCSIsGeorgian
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsGeorgian}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-gothic
@findex xmlUCSIsGothic
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsGothic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-greek
@findex xmlUCSIsGreek
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsGreek}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-greek-extended
@findex xmlUCSIsGreekExtended
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsGreekExtended}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-greekand-coptic
@findex xmlUCSIsGreekandCoptic
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsGreekandCoptic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-gujarati
@findex xmlUCSIsGujarati
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsGujarati}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-gurmukhi
@findex xmlUCSIsGurmukhi
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsGurmukhi}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-halfwidthand-fullwidth-forms
@findex xmlUCSIsHalfwidthandFullwidthForms
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsHalfwidthandFullwidthForms}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-hangul-compatibility-jamo
@findex xmlUCSIsHangulCompatibilityJamo
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsHangulCompatibilityJamo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-hangul-jamo
@findex xmlUCSIsHangulJamo
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsHangulJamo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-hangul-syllables
@findex xmlUCSIsHangulSyllables
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsHangulSyllables}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-hanunoo
@findex xmlUCSIsHanunoo
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsHanunoo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-hebrew
@findex xmlUCSIsHebrew
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsHebrew}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-high-private-use-surrogates
@findex xmlUCSIsHighPrivateUseSurrogates
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsHighPrivateUseSurrogates}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-high-surrogates
@findex xmlUCSIsHighSurrogates
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsHighSurrogates}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-hiragana
@findex xmlUCSIsHiragana
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsHiragana}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-ipa-extensions
@findex xmlUCSIsIPAExtensions
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsIPAExtensions}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-ideographic-description-characters
@findex xmlUCSIsIdeographicDescriptionCharacters
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsIdeographicDescriptionCharacters}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-kanbun
@findex xmlUCSIsKanbun
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsKanbun}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-kangxi-radicals
@findex xmlUCSIsKangxiRadicals
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsKangxiRadicals}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-kannada
@findex xmlUCSIsKannada
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsKannada}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-katakana
@findex xmlUCSIsKatakana
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsKatakana}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-katakana-phonetic-extensions
@findex xmlUCSIsKatakanaPhoneticExtensions
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsKatakanaPhoneticExtensions}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-khmer
@findex xmlUCSIsKhmer
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsKhmer}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-khmer-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsKhmerSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsKhmerSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-lao
@findex xmlUCSIsLao
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLao}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-latin1-supplement
@findex xmlUCSIsLatin1Supplement
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLatin1Supplement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-latin-extended-a
@findex xmlUCSIsLatinExtendedA
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLatinExtendedA}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-latin-extended-b
@findex xmlUCSIsLatinExtendedB
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLatinExtendedB}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-latin-extended-additional
@findex xmlUCSIsLatinExtendedAdditional
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLatinExtendedAdditional}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-letterlike-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsLetterlikeSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLetterlikeSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-limbu
@findex xmlUCSIsLimbu
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLimbu}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-linear-b-ideograms
@findex xmlUCSIsLinearBIdeograms
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLinearBIdeograms}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-linear-b-syllabary
@findex xmlUCSIsLinearBSyllabary
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLinearBSyllabary}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-low-surrogates
@findex xmlUCSIsLowSurrogates
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsLowSurrogates}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-malayalam
@findex xmlUCSIsMalayalam
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMalayalam}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-mathematical-alphanumeric-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsMathematicalAlphanumericSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMathematicalAlphanumericSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-mathematical-operators
@findex xmlUCSIsMathematicalOperators
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMathematicalOperators}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-miscellaneous-mathematical-symbols-a
@findex xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousMathematicalSymbolsA
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousMathematicalSymbolsA}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-miscellaneous-mathematical-symbols-b
@findex xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousMathematicalSymbolsB
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousMathematicalSymbolsB}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-miscellaneous-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-miscellaneous-symbolsand-arrows
@findex xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousSymbolsandArrows
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousSymbolsandArrows}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-miscellaneous-technical
@findex xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousTechnical
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMiscellaneousTechnical}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-mongolian
@findex xmlUCSIsMongolian
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMongolian}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-musical-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsMusicalSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMusicalSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-myanmar
@findex xmlUCSIsMyanmar
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsMyanmar}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-number-forms
@findex xmlUCSIsNumberForms
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsNumberForms}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-ogham
@findex xmlUCSIsOgham
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsOgham}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-old-italic
@findex xmlUCSIsOldItalic
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsOldItalic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-optical-character-recognition
@findex xmlUCSIsOpticalCharacterRecognition
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsOpticalCharacterRecognition}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-oriya
@findex xmlUCSIsOriya
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsOriya}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-osmanya
@findex xmlUCSIsOsmanya
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsOsmanya}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-phonetic-extensions
@findex xmlUCSIsPhoneticExtensions
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsPhoneticExtensions}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-private-use
@findex xmlUCSIsPrivateUse
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsPrivateUse}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-private-use-area
@findex xmlUCSIsPrivateUseArea
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsPrivateUseArea}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-runic
@findex xmlUCSIsRunic
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsRunic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-shavian
@findex xmlUCSIsShavian
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsShavian}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-sinhala
@findex xmlUCSIsSinhala
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSinhala}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-small-form-variants
@findex xmlUCSIsSmallFormVariants
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSmallFormVariants}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-spacing-modifier-letters
@findex xmlUCSIsSpacingModifierLetters
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSpacingModifierLetters}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-specials
@findex xmlUCSIsSpecials
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSpecials}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-superscriptsand-subscripts
@findex xmlUCSIsSuperscriptsandSubscripts
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSuperscriptsandSubscripts}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-supplemental-arrows-a
@findex xmlUCSIsSupplementalArrowsA
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSupplementalArrowsA}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-supplemental-arrows-b
@findex xmlUCSIsSupplementalArrowsB
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSupplementalArrowsB}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-supplemental-mathematical-operators
@findex xmlUCSIsSupplementalMathematicalOperators
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSupplementalMathematicalOperators}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-supplementary-private-use-area-a
@findex xmlUCSIsSupplementaryPrivateUseAreaA
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSupplementaryPrivateUseAreaA}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-supplementary-private-use-area-b
@findex xmlUCSIsSupplementaryPrivateUseAreaB
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSupplementaryPrivateUseAreaB}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-syriac
@findex xmlUCSIsSyriac
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsSyriac}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-tagalog
@findex xmlUCSIsTagalog
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsTagalog}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-tagbanwa
@findex xmlUCSIsTagbanwa
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsTagbanwa}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-tags
@findex xmlUCSIsTags
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsTags}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-tai-le
@findex xmlUCSIsTaiLe
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsTaiLe}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-tai-xuan-jing-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsTaiXuanJingSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsTaiXuanJingSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-tamil
@findex xmlUCSIsTamil
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsTamil}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-telugu
@findex xmlUCSIsTelugu
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsTelugu}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-thaana
@findex xmlUCSIsThaana
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsThaana}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-thai
@findex xmlUCSIsThai
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsThai}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-tibetan
@findex xmlUCSIsTibetan
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsTibetan}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-ugaritic
@findex xmlUCSIsUgaritic
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsUgaritic}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-unified-canadian-aboriginal-syllabics
@findex xmlUCSIsUnifiedCanadianAboriginalSyllabics
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsUnifiedCanadianAboriginalSyllabics}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-variation-selectors
@findex xmlUCSIsVariationSelectors
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsVariationSelectors}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-variation-selectors-supplement
@findex xmlUCSIsVariationSelectorsSupplement
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsVariationSelectorsSupplement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-yi-radicals
@findex xmlUCSIsYiRadicals
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsYiRadicals}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-yi-syllables
@findex xmlUCSIsYiSyllables
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsYiSyllables}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-yijing-hexagram-symbols
@findex xmlUCSIsYijingHexagramSymbols
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsYijingHexagramSymbols}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-block
@findex xmlUCSIsBlock
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsBlock}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-c
@findex xmlUCSIsCatC
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatC}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-cc
@findex xmlUCSIsCatCc
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatCc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-cf
@findex xmlUCSIsCatCf
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatCf}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-co
@findex xmlUCSIsCatCo
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatCo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-cs
@findex xmlUCSIsCatCs
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatCs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-l
@findex xmlUCSIsCatL
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatL}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-ll
@findex xmlUCSIsCatLl
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatLl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-lm
@findex xmlUCSIsCatLm
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatLm}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-lo
@findex xmlUCSIsCatLo
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatLo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-lt
@findex xmlUCSIsCatLt
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatLt}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-lu
@findex xmlUCSIsCatLu
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatLu}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-m
@findex xmlUCSIsCatM
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatM}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-mc
@findex xmlUCSIsCatMc
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatMc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-me
@findex xmlUCSIsCatMe
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatMe}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-mn
@findex xmlUCSIsCatMn
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatMn}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-n
@findex xmlUCSIsCatN
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatN}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-nd
@findex xmlUCSIsCatNd
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatNd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-nl
@findex xmlUCSIsCatNl
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatNl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-no
@findex xmlUCSIsCatNo
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatNo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-p
@findex xmlUCSIsCatP
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatP}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-pc
@findex xmlUCSIsCatPc
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatPc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-pd
@findex xmlUCSIsCatPd
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatPd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-pe
@findex xmlUCSIsCatPe
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatPe}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-pf
@findex xmlUCSIsCatPf
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatPf}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-pi
@findex xmlUCSIsCatPi
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatPi}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-po
@findex xmlUCSIsCatPo
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatPo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-ps
@findex xmlUCSIsCatPs
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatPs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-s
@findex xmlUCSIsCatS
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatS}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-sc
@findex xmlUCSIsCatSc
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatSc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-sk
@findex xmlUCSIsCatSk
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatSk}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-sm
@findex xmlUCSIsCatSm
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatSm}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-so
@findex xmlUCSIsCatSo
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatSo}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-z
@findex xmlUCSIsCatZ
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatZ}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-zl
@findex xmlUCSIsCatZl
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatZl}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-zp
@findex xmlUCSIsCatZp
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatZp}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat-zs
@findex xmlUCSIsCatZs
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCatZs}.
@end defun


@defun xml-ucs-is-cat
@findex xmlUCSIsCat
Alias for @func{xmlUCSIsCat}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Compile--time version informations

@defun xml-check-version
@findex xmlCheckVersion
Alias for @func{xmlCheckVersion}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Text writing @api{} for @axml{}

@defun xml-new-text-writer
@findex xmlNewTextWriter
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextWriter}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-text-writer-filename
@findex xmlNewTextWriterFilename
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextWriterFilename}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-text-writer-memory
@findex xmlNewTextWriterMemory
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextWriterMemory}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-text-writer-push-parser
@findex xmlNewTextWriterPushParser
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextWriterPushParser}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-text-writer-doc
@findex xmlNewTextWriterDoc
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextWriterDoc}.
@end defun


@defun xml-new-text-writer-tree
@findex xmlNewTextWriterTree
Alias for @func{xmlNewTextWriterTree}.
@end defun


@defun xml-free-text-writer
@findex xmlFreeTextWriter
Alias for @func{xmlFreeTextWriter}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-document
@findex xmlTextWriterStartDocument
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartDocument}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-document
@findex xmlTextWriterEndDocument
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndDocument}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-comment
@findex xmlTextWriterStartComment
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartComment}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-comment
@findex xmlTextWriterEndComment
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndComment}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-comment
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteComment
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteComment}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-element
@findex xmlTextWriterStartElement
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-element-ns
@findex xmlTextWriterStartElementNS
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartElementNS}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-element
@findex xmlTextWriterEndElement
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-full-end-element
@findex xmlTextWriterFullEndElement
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterFullEndElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-element
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteElement
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-element-ns
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteElementNS
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteElementNS}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-raw-len
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteRawLen
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteRawLen}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-raw
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteRaw
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteRaw}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-string
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteString
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-base64
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteBase64
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteBase64}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-bin-hex
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteBinHex
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteBinHex}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-attribute
@findex xmlTextWriterStartAttribute
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartAttribute}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-attribute-ns
@findex xmlTextWriterStartAttributeNS
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartAttributeNS}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-attribute
@findex xmlTextWriterEndAttribute
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndAttribute}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-attribute
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteAttribute
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteAttribute}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-attribute-ns
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteAttributeNS
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteAttributeNS}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-pi
@findex xmlTextWriterStartPI
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartPI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-pi
@findex xmlTextWriterEndPI
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndPI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-pi
@findex xmlTextWriterWritePI
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWritePI}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-cdata
@findex xmlTextWriterStartCDATA
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartCDATA}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-cdata
@findex xmlTextWriterEndCDATA
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndCDATA}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-cdata
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteCDATA
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteCDATA}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-dtd
@findex xmlTextWriterStartDTD
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartDTD}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-dtd
@findex xmlTextWriterEndDTD
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndDTD}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-dtd
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteDTD
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteDTD}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-dtd-element
@findex xmlTextWriterStartDTDElement
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartDTDElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-dtd-element
@findex xmlTextWriterEndDTDElement
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndDTDElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-dtd-element
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteDTDElement
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteDTDElement}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-dtd-attlist
@findex xmlTextWriterStartDTDAttlist
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartDTDAttlist}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-dtd-attlist
@findex xmlTextWriterEndDTDAttlist
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndDTDAttlist}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-dtd-attlist
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteDTDAttlist
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteDTDAttlist}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-start-dtd-entity
@findex xmlTextWriterStartDTDEntity
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterStartDTDEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-end-dtd-entity
@findex xmlTextWriterEndDTDEntity
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterEndDTDEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-dtd-internal-entity
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteDTDInternalEntity
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteDTDInternalEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-dtd-external-entity
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteDTDExternalEntity
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteDTDExternalEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-dtd-external-entity-contents
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteDTDExternalEntityContents
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteDTDExternalEntityContents}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-dtd-entity
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteDTDEntity
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteDTDEntity}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-write-dtd-notation
@findex xmlTextWriterWriteDTDNotation
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterWriteDTDNotation}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-set-indent
@findex xmlTextWriterSetIndent
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterSetIndent}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-set-indent-string
@findex xmlTextWriterSetIndentString
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterSetIndentString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-text-writer-flush
@findex xmlTextWriterFlush
Alias for @func{xmlTextWriterFlush}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @axml{} Path Language implementation

@defun xml-xpath-free-object
@findex xmlXPathFreeObject
Alias for @func{xmlXPathFreeObject}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-node-set-create
@findex xmlXPathNodeSetCreate
Alias for @func{xmlXPathNodeSetCreate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-free-node-set-list
@findex xmlXPathFreeNodeSetList
Alias for @func{xmlXPathFreeNodeSetList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-free-node-set
@findex xmlXPathFreeNodeSet
Alias for @func{xmlXPathFreeNodeSet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-object-copy
@findex xmlXPathObjectCopy
Alias for @func{xmlXPathObjectCopy}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cmp-nodes
@findex xmlXPathCmpNodes
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCmpNodes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-number-to-boolean
@findex xmlXPathCastNumberToBoolean
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastNumberToBoolean}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-string-to-boolean
@findex xmlXPathCastStringToBoolean
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastStringToBoolean}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-node-set-to-boolean
@findex xmlXPathCastNodeSetToBoolean
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastNodeSetToBoolean}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-to-boolean
@findex xmlXPathCastToBoolean
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastToBoolean}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-boolean-to-number
@findex xmlXPathCastBooleanToNumber
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastBooleanToNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-string-to-number
@findex xmlXPathCastStringToNumber
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastStringToNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-node-to-number
@findex xmlXPathCastNodeToNumber
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastNodeToNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-node-set-to-number
@findex xmlXPathCastNodeSetToNumber
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastNodeSetToNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-to-number
@findex xmlXPathCastToNumber
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastToNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-boolean-to-string
@findex xmlXPathCastBooleanToString
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastBooleanToString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-number-to-string
@findex xmlXPathCastNumberToString
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastNumberToString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-node-to-string
@findex xmlXPathCastNodeToString
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastNodeToString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-node-set-to-string
@findex xmlXPathCastNodeSetToString
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastNodeSetToString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-cast-to-string
@findex xmlXPathCastToString
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCastToString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-convert-boolean
@findex xmlXPathConvertBoolean
Alias for @func{xmlXPathConvertBoolean}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-convert-number
@findex xmlXPathConvertNumber
Alias for @func{xmlXPathConvertNumber}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-convert-string
@findex xmlXPathConvertString
Alias for @func{xmlXPathConvertString}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-new-context
@findex xmlXPathNewContext
Alias for @func{xmlXPathNewContext}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-free-context
@findex xmlXPathFreeContext
Alias for @func{xmlXPathFreeContext}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-context-set-cache
@findex xmlXPathContextSetCache
Alias for @func{xmlXPathContextSetCache}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-order-doc-elems
@findex xmlXPathOrderDocElems
Alias for @func{xmlXPathOrderDocElems}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-eval
@findex xmlXPathEval
Alias for @func{xmlXPathEval}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-eval-expression
@findex xmlXPathEvalExpression
Alias for @func{xmlXPathEvalExpression}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-eval-predicate
@findex xmlXPathEvalPredicate
Alias for @func{xmlXPathEvalPredicate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-compile
@findex xmlXPathCompile
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCompile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-ctxt-compile
@findex xmlXPathCtxtCompile
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCtxtCompile}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-compiled-eval
@findex xmlXPathCompiledEval
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCompiledEval}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-compiled-eval-to-boolean
@findex xmlXPathCompiledEvalToBoolean
Alias for @func{xmlXPathCompiledEvalToBoolean}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-free-comp-expr
@findex xmlXPathFreeCompExpr
Alias for @func{xmlXPathFreeCompExpr}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-init
@findex xmlXPathInit
Alias for @func{xmlXPathInit}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-is-nan
@findex xmlXPathIsNaN
Alias for @func{xmlXPathIsNaN}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xpath-is-inf
@findex xmlXPathIsInf
Alias for @func{xmlXPathIsInf}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @api{} to handle @axml{} Pointers

@defun xml-xptr-location-set-create
@findex xmlXPtrLocationSetCreate
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrLocationSetCreate}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-free-location-set
@findex xmlXPtrFreeLocationSet
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrFreeLocationSet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-location-set-merge
@findex xmlXPtrLocationSetMerge
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrLocationSetMerge}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-range
@findex xmlXPtrNewRange
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewRange}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-range-points
@findex xmlXPtrNewRangePoints
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewRangePoints}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-range-node-point
@findex xmlXPtrNewRangeNodePoint
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewRangeNodePoint}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-range-point-node
@findex xmlXPtrNewRangePointNode
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewRangePointNode}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-range-nodes
@findex xmlXPtrNewRangeNodes
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewRangeNodes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-location-set-nodes
@findex xmlXPtrNewLocationSetNodes
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewLocationSetNodes}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-location-set-node-set
@findex xmlXPtrNewLocationSetNodeSet
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewLocationSetNodeSet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-range-node-object
@findex xmlXPtrNewRangeNodeObject
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewRangeNodeObject}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-collapsed-range
@findex xmlXPtrNewCollapsedRange
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewCollapsedRange}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-location-set-add
@findex xmlXPtrLocationSetAdd
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrLocationSetAdd}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-wrap-location-set
@findex xmlXPtrWrapLocationSet
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrWrapLocationSet}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-location-set-del
@findex xmlXPtrLocationSetDel
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrLocationSetDel}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-location-set-remove
@findex xmlXPtrLocationSetRemove
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrLocationSetRemove}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-new-context
@findex xmlXPtrNewContext
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrNewContext}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-eval
@findex xmlXPtrEval
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrEval}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-range-to-function
@findex xmlXPtrRangeToFunction
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrRangeToFunction}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-build-node-list
@findex xmlXPtrBuildNodeList
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrBuildNodeList}.
@end defun


@defun xml-xptr-eval-range-predicate
@findex xmlXPtrEvalRangePredicate
Alias for @func{xmlXPtrEvalRangePredicate}.
@end defun

@c page
@node callbacks
@chapter Callback makers


The bindings described in this chapter are exported by the @library{xml
libxml2 primitives} library and reexported by the @library{xml libxml2}
library.  Notice that variadic callback makers are not interfaced.

Unless otherwise specified, the following makers are plain builders
like:

@example
(define (make-xml-c14n-is-visible-callback scheme-function)
  (make-c-callback* int
                    scheme-function
                    (void* xmlNodePtr xmlNodePtr)))
@end example

@noindent
for correct callback usage it is usually required to wrap the body of
the Scheme function in a @func{guard} form, to prevent exception stack
unwinding to traverse a call to a foreign function.


@defun make-xml-c14n-is-visible-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlC14NIsVisibleCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlC14NIsVisibleCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-shell-readline-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlShellReadlineFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlShellReadlineFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-shell-cmd @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlShellCmd
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlShellCmd}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-char-encoding-input-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlCharEncodingInputFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlCharEncodingInputFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-char-encoding-output-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlCharEncodingOutputFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlCharEncodingOutputFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-parser-input-buffer-create-filename-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlParserInputBufferCreateFilenameFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlParserInputBufferCreateFilenameFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-output-buffer-create-filename-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlOutputBufferCreateFilenameFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlOutputBufferCreateFilenameFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-register-node-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlRegisterNodeFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlRegisterNodeFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-deregister-node-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlDeregisterNodeFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlDeregisterNodeFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-hash-deallocator @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlHashDeallocator
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlHashDeallocator}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-hash-copier @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlHashCopier
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlHashCopier}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-hash-scanner @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlHashScanner
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlHashScanner}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-hash-scanner-full @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlHashScannerFull
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlHashScannerFull}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-list-deallocator @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlListDeallocator
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlListDeallocator}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-list-data-compare @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlListDataCompare
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlListDataCompare}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-list-walker @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlListWalker
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlListWalker}.
@end defun


@defun make-ftp-list-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex ftpListCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{ftpListCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-ftp-data-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex ftpDataCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{ftpDataCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-parser-input-deallocate @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlParserInputDeallocate
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlParserInputDeallocate}.
@end defun


@defun make-resolve-entity-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex resolveEntitySAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{resolveEntitySAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-internal-subset-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex internalSubsetSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{internalSubsetSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-external-subset-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex externalSubsetSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{externalSubsetSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-get-entity-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex getEntitySAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{getEntitySAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-get-parameter-entity-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex getParameterEntitySAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{getParameterEntitySAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-entity-decl-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex entityDeclSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{entityDeclSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-notation-decl-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex notationDeclSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{notationDeclSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-attribute-decl-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex attributeDeclSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{attributeDeclSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-element-decl-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex elementDeclSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{elementDeclSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-unparsed-entity-decl-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex unparsedEntityDeclSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{unparsedEntityDeclSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-set-document-locator-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex setDocumentLocatorSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{setDocumentLocatorSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-start-document-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex startDocumentSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{startDocumentSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-end-document-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex endDocumentSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{endDocumentSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-start-element-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex startElementSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{startElementSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-end-element-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex endElementSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{endElementSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-attribute-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex attributeSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{attributeSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-reference-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex referenceSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{referenceSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-characters-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex charactersSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{charactersSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-ignorable-whitespace-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex ignorableWhitespaceSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{ignorableWhitespaceSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-comment-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex commentSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{commentSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-cdata-block-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex cdataBlockSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{cdataBlockSAXFunc}.
@end defun

@c make-warning-sax-func		;;Variadic!!!
@c make-error-sax-func			;;Variadic!!!
@c make-fatal-error-sax-func		;;Variadic!!!

@defun make-is-standalone-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex isStandaloneSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{isStandaloneSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-has-internal-subset-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex hasInternalSubsetSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{hasInternalSubsetSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-has-external-subset-sax-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex hasExternalSubsetSAXFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{hasExternalSubsetSAXFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-start-element-ns-sax2-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex startElementNsSAX2Func
Build and return a callback of type @code{startElementNsSAX2Func}.
@end defun


@defun make-end-element-ns-sax2-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex endElementNsSAX2Func
Build and return a callback of type @code{endElementNsSAX2Func}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-external-entity-loader @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlExternalEntityLoader
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlExternalEntityLoader}.
@end defun


@c make-xml-relax-ng-validity-error-func	;;Variadic!!!
@c make-xml-relax-ng-validity-warning-func	;;Variadic!!!
@c make-xml-schematron-validity-error-func	;;Variadic!!!
@c make-xml-schematron-validity-warning-func 	;;Variadic!!!


@defun make-xml-dom-wrap-acquire-ns-function @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlDOMWrapAcquireNsFunction
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlDOMWrapAcquireNsFunction}.
@end defun


@c make-xml-validity-error-func			;;Variadic!!!
@c make-xml-validity-warning-func		;;Variadic!!!
@c make-xml-generic-error-func			;;Variadic!!!


@defun make-xml-structured-error-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlStructuredErrorFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlStructuredErrorFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-input-match-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlInputMatchCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlInputMatchCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-input-open-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlInputOpenCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlInputOpenCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-input-read-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlInputReadCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlInputReadCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-input-close-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlInputCloseCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlInputCloseCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-output-match-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlOutputMatchCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlOutputMatchCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-output-open-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlOutputOpenCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlOutputOpenCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-output-write-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlOutputWriteCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlOutputWriteCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-output-close-callback @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlOutputCloseCallback
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlOutputCloseCallback}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-free-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlFreeFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlFreeFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-malloc-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlMallocFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlMallocFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-realloc-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlReallocFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlReallocFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-strdup-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlStrdupFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlStrdupFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-text-reader-error-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlTextReaderErrorFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlTextReaderErrorFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-reg-exec-callbacks @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlRegExecCallbacks
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlRegExecCallbacks}.
@end defun


@c make-xml-schema-validity-error-func 		;;Variadic!!!
@c make-xml-schema-validity-warning-func 	;;Variadic!!!


@defun make-xml-xpath-convert-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlXPathConvertFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlXPathConvertFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-xpath-eval-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlXPathEvalFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlXPathEvalFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-xpath-axis-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlXPathAxisFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlXPathAxisFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-xpath-function @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlXPathFunction
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlXPathFunction}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-xpath-variable-lookup-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlXPathVariableLookupFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlXPathVariableLookupFunc}.
@end defun


@defun make-xml-xpath-func-lookup-func @var{scheme-function}
@tindex xmlXPathFuncLookupFunc
Build and return a callback of type @code{xmlXPathFuncLookupFunc}.
@end defun

@c page
@node examples
@chapter Usage examples


@menu
* examples file::               Parsing an @axml{} file.
* examples html::               Parsing @ahtml{}.
@end menu

@c page
@node examples file
@section Parsing an @axml{} file


The following example shows how to parse a simple @axml{} file and walk
its tree.

@smallexample
(import (nausicaa)
  (compensations)
  (foreign ffi)
  (foreign cstrings)
  (xml libxml2))

(define pathname "proof.xml")
(define xml
  "<?xml version=\"1.0\"?>
   <alpha>
     <beta>
       ciao
     </beta>
   </alpha>")

(with-compensations
    (compensate
        (xml-check-version LIBXML_VERSION)
      (with
       (xml-cleanup-parser)))

    (compensate
      (with-output-to-file pathname
        (lambda ()
          (display xml)))
      (with
       (delete-file pathname)))

  (letrec ((doc (compensate
                    (xml-parse-file
                       (string->cstring/c pathname))
                  (with
                   (xml-free-doc doc)))))
    (assert (not (pointer-null? doc)))

    ((recursion (walk-tree root-node)
      (let loop ((tree '())
                 (node root-node))
        (with-struct-xmlNode node
           (if (pointer-null? node)
               (reverse tree)
             (loop (cons (cons (cstring->string node.name)
                               (walk-tree node.children))
                         tree)
                   node.next)))))
     (xml-doc-get-root-element doc))))
@result{} (("alpha" ("beta" ("text"))))

@end smallexample

@c page
@node examples html
@section Parsing @ahtml{}


The following example shows how to parse a simple @acronym{HTML} page
and walk its tree.

@smallexample
(import (nausicaa)
  (compensations)
  (foreign ffi)
  (foreign cstrings)
  (xml libxml2))

(define html-page "
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC \"-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01//EN\">
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Marco Maggi Vanity Pages</title>
    <link href=\"webpage.css\"
          rel=\"stylesheet\" type=\"text/css\">
   </head>
  <body>
  <p>This is the body</p>
  </body>
</html>
<!-- end of page -->")

(with-compensations
    (compensate
        (xml-check-version LIBXML_VERSION)
      (with
       (xml-cleanup-parser)))
  (letrec ((parser (compensate
                       (html-create-push-parser-ctxt
                           pointer-null pointer-null
                           pointer-null 0
                           pointer-null 0)
                     (with
                      (xml-free-doc
                         (struct-xmlParserCtxt-myDoc-ref parser))
                      (html-free-parser-ctxt parser)))))
    (define-xmlParserCtxt parser)

    (html-ctxt-use-options parser
                           (bitwise-ior HTML_PARSE_NOBLANKS
                                        HTML_PARSE_NOERROR
                                        HTML_PARSE_NOWARNING
                                        HTML_PARSE_NONET))

    (let* ((page.ptr (string->cstring/c html-page))
           (page.len (strlen page.ptr)))
      (html-parse-chunk parser page.ptr page.len 1))

    ((recursion (walk-tree root-node)
      (let loop ((tree '())
                 (node root-node))
        (with-struct-xmlNode node
           (if (pointer-null? node)
               (reverse tree)
             (loop (cons (cons (cstring->string node.name)
                               (walk-tree node.children))
                         tree)
                   node.next)))))
     (xml-doc-get-root-element parser.myDoc))))
@result{} (("html"
      ("head"
        ("title" ("text"))
        ("link"))
      ("body"
        ("p" ("text")))))
@end smallexample

@c page

@include gpl-3.0.texiinc
@include fdl-1.3.texiinc

@c page
@node references
@appendix Bibliography and references



@c page
@node concept index
@appendix An entry for each concept

@printindex cp

@node function index
@appendix An entry for each function.

@printindex fn

@node variable index
@appendix An entry for each variable.

@printindex vr

@node type index
@appendix An entry for each type.

@printindex tp

@contents
@bye

@c end of file
