\input texinfo.tex
@c %**start of header
@setfilename nausicaa.info
@settitle Nausicaa
@c %**end of header

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@include version.texiinc


@macro configure
@command{configure}
@end macro


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c License macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gnu{}
@acronym{GNU}
@end macro

@macro gpl{}
@acronym{GPL}
@end macro

@macro fdl{}
@acronym{FDL}
@end macro

@macro bsd{}
@acronym{BSD}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Miscellaneous acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro ansi{}
@acronym{ANSI}
@end macro

@macro api{}
@acronym{API}
@end macro

@macro ascii{}
@acronym{ASCII}
@end macro

@macro cpu{}
@acronym{CPU}
@end macro

@macro ieee{}
@acronym{IEEE}
@end macro

@macro iso{}
@acronym{ISO}
@end macro

@macro ffi{}
@acronym{FFI}
@end macro

@macro ram{}
@acronym{RAM}
@end macro

@macro posix{}
@acronym{POSIX}
@end macro

@c Remember that @url is already used by Texinfo.
@macro urla{}
@acronym{URL}
@end macro

@macro utf{}
@acronym{UTF}
@end macro


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Software related macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gmp{}
@acronym{GMP}
@end macro

@macro gcc{}
@acronym{GCC}
@end macro

@macro glibc{}
@gnu{} C Library
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Network related acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro tcp{}
@acronym{TCP}
@end macro

@macro udp{}
@acronym{UDP}
@end macro

@macro icmp{}
@acronym{ICMP}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro http{}
@acronym{HTTP}
@end macro

@macro https{}
@acronym{HTTP}
@end macro

@macro ftp{}
@acronym{FTP}
@end macro

@macro smtp{}
@acronym{SMTP}
@end macro

@macro snmp{}
@acronym{SNMP}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Arguments macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro vari{ARG}
@var{\ARG\1}
@end macro

@macro varii{ARG}
@var{\ARG\2}
@end macro

@macro variii{ARG}
@var{\ARG\3}
@end macro

@macro variv{ARG}
@var{\ARG\4}
@end macro

@macro varn{ARG}
@var{\ARG\n}
@end macro

@macro vark{ARG}
@var{\ARG\k}
@end macro

@macro varj{ARG}
@var{\ARG\j}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro meta{ARG}
<\ARG\>
@end macro

@macro metai{ARG}
@meta{\ARG\1}
@end macro

@macro metaii{ARG}
@meta{\ARG\2}
@end macro

@macro metaiii{ARG}
@meta{\ARG\3}
@end macro

@macro metaiv{ARG}
@meta{\ARG\4}
@end macro

@macro metan{ARG}
@meta{\ARG\n}
@end macro

@macro metak{ARG}
@meta{\ARG\k}
@end macro

@macro metaj{ARG}
@meta{\ARG\j}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c C language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro cfunc{NAME}
@code{\NAME\()}
@end macro

@macro null{}
@code{NULL}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro fasl{}
@acronym{FASL}
@end macro

@macro clos{}
@acronym{CLOS}
@end macro

@macro library{NAME}
@code{(\NAME\)}
@end macro

@macro module{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro repl{}
@acronym{REPL}
@end macro

@macro rnrs{VERSION}
@acronym{R\VERSION\RS}
@end macro

@macro srfi{}
@acronym{SRFI}
@end macro

@ignore
Separating the @srfi{}  macro from the number with a  '--' rather than a
'-' makes the expansion look ugly in menu entries under the Info reader.
IMHO this should not happen, but  it does; so we live with this, because
the main purpose of this document is to provide an Info version.
@end ignore
@macro ansrfi{NUM}
@srfi{}-\NUM\
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro func{NAME}
@code{@sc{\NAME\}}
@end macro

@macro nil{}
@code{()}
@end macro

@macro true{}
@code{#t}
@end macro

@macro false{}
@code{#f}
@end macro

@macro keyword{NAME}
@code{#:\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro class{NAME}
@code{<\NAME\>}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros for references to external documents.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro glibcref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,libc}
@end macro

@macro rsixref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,r6rs}
@end macro

@macro rfiveref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,r5rs}
@end macro

@macro ikarusref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,ikarus}
@end macro

@macro autoconfref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,autoconf}
@end macro

@macro bibref{TAG}
@code{[\TAG\]}
@end macro


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Values.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@set TITLE                      Nausicaa

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the full
@c name of this package.
@set PACKAGE                    Nausicaa

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the
@c nickname of the project: the name that is used to compose the
@c distribution tarball or the web address.
@set PACKAGE_NICKNAME           nausicaa

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR} whenever we need to include the list of
@c authors of this document.
@set AUTHOR                     Marco Maggi

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL} whenever we need to include the
@c email of the *single* author of this document.
@set AUTHOR_EMAIL               @email{marcomaggi@@gna.org}

@c To be used as @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} whenever we need to include the
@c list of copyright years.
@set COPYRIGHT_YEARS            2008


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Copyright notice.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
@noindent
This document describes version @version{} of @value{PACKAGE}, a
distribution of Scheme language libraries for Ikarus Scheme.

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} by @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the @gnu{} Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with
Invariant Sections being ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License'' and
``@gnu{} General Public License, no Front--Cover Texts, and no
Back--Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Headers.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Revision @version{}
@author @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ifinfo
@dircategory Development
@direntry
* nausicaa: (nausicaa).         A distribution of libraries
                                for Ikarus Scheme.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ignore
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@end ignore

@c page
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

@insertcopying

@menu
* overview::                    Overview of the package.

The configure script

* conf::                        Configuration.
* conf helpers::                Helper macros.
* conf common::                 Common script blocks.
* conf scheme::                 Macros for Scheme language.
* conf clang::                  Macros for C language.

The Makefile

* vars::                        Variables.
* rules::                       Rules.
* package::                     Building packages.

Appendices

* Documentation License::       GNU Free Documentation License.
* references::                  Bibliography and references.

Indexes

* concept index::               An entry for each concept.
* function index::              An entry for each function.
* variable index::              An entry for each variable.
* type index::                  An entry for each type.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@c page
@node overview
@chapter Overview of the package


@noindent
@value{PACKAGE} is a distribution of Scheme language libraries for
@rnrs{6} Scheme, targeting Ypsilon and Ikarus.  This document describes
the project building and installation infrastructure, which is used by
almost all the projects in the distribution.

Almost all the projects in Nausicaa are pure Scheme; the Stubs projects
collects adapter C language libraries.  Access to foreign shared
libraries is written with the Foreign Functions Interface (@ffi{})
provided by the Scheme implementation.


@menu
* overview conventions::        Conventions.
@end menu


@c page
@node overview conventions
@section Conventions


This guide tries to stick to the following naming conventions:

@table @emph
@item file name
@itemx directory name
it is the last component of the file or directory identifier; the name
of the file in @file{/bin/bash} is @code{bash}, while the name of the
directory in @file{/usr/local} is @code{local};

@item file pathname
@itemx directory pathname
it is a file or directory identifier that includes a name and a
directory part; @file{/bin/bash} is a file pathname and
@file{/usr/local} is a directory pathname;

@item file basename
@itemx directory basename
it is a file or directory name with the extension stripped (including
the dot); the basename of the file in @file{/etc/lilo.conf} is
@code{lilo}, while the basename of the directory in @file{/etc/rc.d} is
@code{rc};

@item file rootname
@itemx directory rootname
it is a file or directory pathname with the extension stripped
(including the dot); the rootname of the file in @file{/etc/lilo.conf}
is @code{/etc/lilo}, while the rootname of the directory in
@file{/etc/rc.d} is @code{/etc/rc};

@item path
it is a list of directory pathnames to look into when searching for a
file or directory name.
@end table


@c page
@node conf
@chapter Configuration


The configuration of a project for building, installation and binary
package creation is managed with @gnu{} Autoconf.  Each project
subdirectory has a @command{configure} script that must be run to
initialise the infrastructure.

Let's take the @code{scmobj} project as example; we should do this:

@example
$ tar --extract --bzip2 --file=nausicaa-0.1d2.tar.bz2
$ cd nausicaa-0.1d2
$ cd scmobj
$ mkdir "=build"
$ cd "=build"
$ ../configure
@end example

@noindent
then we are ready to apply the @command{make} program to the
@file{Makefile}.


@menu
* conf options::                Options for @command{configure}.
@end menu


@c page
@node conf options
@section Options for @command{configure}


For the full list of available configuration options, we should try the
command:

@example
$ ../configure --help
@end example

@noindent
what follows is a list of common options.


@table @code
@item --enable-ikarus
@itemx --enable-ypsilon
@c @itemx --enable-larceny
Enable the usage of a Scheme implementation.

@item --prefix=@var{value}
Select the directory to be used as installation prefix; all the files
installed by a project will end under this directory; it defaults to
@file{/usr/local}.

@item --enable-fasl
@itemx --disable-fasl
Enable or disable the compilation and installation of @fasl{} files;
these are the precompiled version of the installed libraries.  It
defaults to: no, do not precompile files.

At present (revision 1695) only libraries can be compiled by Ikarus.

@item --enable-sls
@itemx --disable-sls
Enable or disable the installation of source files.  It defaults to:
yes, install the source files.

@item --enable-doc
@itemx --disable-doc
Enable or disable the compilation and installation of documentation
files.  It defaults to: yes, build and install the documentation.

@item --enable-doc-info
@itemx --disable-doc-info
Enable or disable the compilation and installation of Info documentation
files.  It defaults to: yes, build and install the Info documentation.

@item --enable-doc-html
@itemx --disable-doc-html
Enable or disable the compilation and installation of @acronym{HTML}
documentation files.  It defaults to: no, @strong{do not} build and
install the @acronym{HTML} documentation.
@end table


@c page
@node conf helpers
@chapter Helper macros


@menu
* conf helpers options::        Command line options.
* conf helpers programs::       Finding programs.
* conf helpers tmpfile::        Temporary files.
@end menu


@c page
@node conf helpers options
@section Command line options


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_ENABLE_OPTION (@var{variable}, @var{identifier}, @var{default}, @var{checking-description}, @var{option-description})
Define an enable/disable command line option for @configure{}.  Set
@var{variable} to @code{yes} if the enable option is used, to @code{no}
if the disable option is used.

@var{variable} is an output variable, it is used as argument for
@code{AC_SUBST}.

@var{identifier} is the key used to define the options, which will be
@code{--enable-@var{identifier}} and @code{--disable-@var{identifier}}.

@var{default} is the default value for @var{variable} if neither the
enable nor the disable options are used.  It must be @code{yes} or
@code{no}.

@var{checking-description} is a description of the feature that is shown
as log message when @configure{} is executed.  It will show as:

@example
checking @var{checking-description} ... yes
@end example

@var{option-description} is the description of the feature that is shown
when @configure{} is executed with the @code{--help} option.

Usage example:

@example
NAUSICAA_ENABLE_OPTION([nausicaa_ENABLE_FASL],[fasl],[no],
   [whether compiled files will be built and installed],
   [enable installation of precompiled libraries])
@end example

@noindent
this defines the options @option{--enable-fasl} and
@option{--disable-fasl}, that can be used to configure the output
variable @code{nausicaa_ENABLE_FASL}.  The default is @code{no}.  The
checking message will show as:

@example
checking whether compiled files will be built and installed ... no
@end example

@noindent
and the help screen will include the lines:

@example
--disable-fasl   enable installation of precompiled libraries
                (default: yes)
@end example

When the default is @code{yes}: it is better to write
@var{option-description} as a description of the disable option, because
that is what the user does to change the default.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_WITH_OPTION (@var{variable}, @var{identifier}, @var{default}, @var{checking-description}, @var{option-description})
Define a @code{--with-} command line option for @configure{}.  Set
@var{variable} to the argument given to the option.

@var{variable} is an output variable, it is used as argument for
@code{AC_SUBST}.

@var{identifier} is the key used to define the option, which will be
@code{--with-@var{identifier}}.

@var{default} is the default value for @var{variable} if the option is
not used.

@var{checking-description} is a description of the feature that is shown
as log message when @configure{} is executed.  It will show as:

@example
checking @var{checking-description} ... @var{default}
@end example

@var{option-description} is the description of the feature that is shown
when @configure{} is executed with the @code{--help} option.

Usage example:

@example
NAUSICAA_WITH_OPTION([package_BUILD_VERSION],[build-version],[1nau],
   [binary package build revision tag],
   [select binary package build revision tag])
@end example

@noindent
this defines the options @option{--with-build-version}, that can be used
to configure the output variable @code{package_BUILD_VERSION}.  The
default is @code{1nau}.  The checking message will show as:

@example
checking binary package build revision tag ... 1nau
@end example

@noindent
and the help screen will include the lines:

@example
--with-build-version    select binary package build revision tag
                        (default: 1nau)
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf helpers programs
@section Finding programs


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_PROGRAM (@var{variable}, @var{program-name}, @var{description})
Find the full pathname of a program and store it into the output
@var{variable}.  If the program is not found: the output variable is set
to @code{:}, which with a Bourne like shell is the no--operation
command: it does nothing and exits with code 0.

Usage example to find the Scheme executables:

@example
NAUSICAA_PROGRAM([IKARUS],
   [ikarus],
   [the Ikarus Scheme executable])
NAUSICAA_PROGRAM([SCHEME_SCRIPT],
   [scheme-script],
   [the scheme-script executable])
NAUSICAA_PROGRAM([YPSILON],
   [ypsilon],
   [another R6RS Scheme])
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf helpers tmpfile
@section Temporary files


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_WITH_TMPFILE (@var{with_temp_file_chunk}, @var{after_chunk})
Execute a chunk of code that uses a temporary file.

The chunk in @var{with_temp_file_chunk} can use the temporary file whose
full pathname is stored in the variable @code{nausicaa_TMPFILE}.

The chunk in @var{after_chunk} will be evaluated after the temporary
file has been removed, so it can safely report errors and terminate the
script.

The code that creates the temporary files makes use of the @env{TMPDIR}
variable, which will default to @file{/tmp} if not set.
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf common
@chapter Common script blocks


A minimal @file{configure.ac} template should look like this:

@example
AC_INIT([nausicaa-posix],[0.1d0])
AC_PREREQ(2.60)
AC_CONFIG_SRCDIR([libraries/compile-all.sps])
NAUSICAA_BEGIN()
dnl project specific options
NAUSICAA_END()
@end example


@menu
* conf common main::            Main macros.
* conf common options::         Configuration options.
* conf common programs::        Programs and directories.
@end menu


@c page
@node conf common main
@section Main macros


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_BEGIN
The starting macro for Nausicaa configuration.  It includes all the
common blocks.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_END
The starting macro for Nausicaa configuration.  Defines the common
output files.
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf common options
@section Configuration options


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_OPTIONS
Define the @configure{} command line option for the Nausicaa build
infrastructure.  These are options that control the building of the
documentation, and the installation of source and precompiled Scheme
files.
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf common programs
@section Programs and directories


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_COMMON_PROGRAMS
Initialises a set of variables to the pathnames of common Unix programs.
Even if not all these programs are used in the Makefile, it does not
hurt to check for them.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_SCHEME_PROGRAMS
Initialises a set of variables to the pathnames of Scheme executables.
This macros finds the Ikarus and Ypsilon programs.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_COMMON_DIRECTORIES
Initialises a bunch of variables representing useful installation
pathnames.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_SLACKWARE_TOOLS
Find Slackware package management tools.  By default the Slackware tools
are installed in:

@example
/sbin/makepkg
/sbin/installpkg
/sbin/removepkg
/sbin/upgradepkg
@end example

This block defines the option @option{--enable-slackware-prefix-tools},
which, if enabled, allows using a customised version of the Slackware
tools under the @code{$(prefix)/sbin} directory.  For example if
@code{prefix} is set to @file{/usr/local} and the option is enabled,
this macro will try to find:

@example
/usr/local/sbin/makepkg
/usr/local/sbin/installpkg
/usr/local/sbin/removepkg
/usr/local/sbin/upgradepkg
@end example

The following output variables are set to the result of the search:

@example
slack_MAKEPKG_PROGRAM
slack_INSTALLPKG_PROGRAM
slack_REMOVEPKG_PROGRAM
slack_UPGRADEPKG_PROGRAM
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_REDHAT_TOOLS
Find RedHat package management tools.  The RedHat tools should be
installed in:

@example
/bin/rpm
/usr/bin/rpmbuild
@end example

The following output variables are set to the result of the search:

@example
redhat_BUILD_PROGRAM
redhat_CORE_PROGRAM
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_PACMAN_TOOLS
Find Pacman package management tool, the program @command{pacman}.  The
following output variable is set to the result of the search:

@example
pacman_PROGRAM
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf scheme
@chapter Macros for Scheme language


@menu
* conf scheme generic::         Running Scheme tests.
* conf scheme ikarus::          Running Ikarus Scheme.
* conf scheme ypsilon::         Running Ypsilon Scheme.
@c * conf scheme larceny::         Running Larceny Scheme.
@end menu


@c page
@node conf scheme generic
@section Running Scheme tests


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_SCHEME_CHECK_LIBRARY (@var{name}, @var{import_spec}, @var{action_if_found}, @var{action_if_not_found})
Attempt to find a Scheme library loadable by all the enabled Scheme
implementations.
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf scheme ikarus
@section Running Ikarus Scheme


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_WITH_OUTPUT_FROM_IKARUS_SCRIPT (@var{scheme_code}, @var{options}, @var{shell_chunk})
Evaluate @var{scheme_code} with Ikarus by storing it in a temporary file
and invoking "@code{$@{IKARUS@} --r6rs-script} with additional command
line @var{options}.  Then, after the temporary file has been removed,
evaluate @var{shell_chunk}.

The script is expected to print a line of text on its standard output,
which will be stored in the shell variable @code{nausicaa_ANSWER}, so
that @var{shell_chunk} can examine it.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_IKARUS_CHECK_LIBRARY (@var{name}, @var{import_spec}, @var{action_if_found}, @var{action_if_not_found})
Attempt to find a Scheme library loadable by Ikarus.

If the library is found the output variable
@code{HAS_IKARUS_LIB_@var{name}} is set to @code{yes}, otherwise it is
set to @code{no}.

The optional @var{action_if_found} is executed if the library was found.
The optional @var{action_if_not_found} is executed if the library was
not found.
@end deffn


As an example, here is the implementation of the macro above:

@example
AC_DEFUN([NAUSICAA_IKARUS_CHECK_LIBRARY],[
AC_MSG_CHECKING([availability of Ikarus library $2])
NAUSICAA_WITH_OUTPUT_FROM_IKARUS_SCRIPT([(import (rnrs) (rnrs eval (6)))
(with-exception-handler
  (lambda (ex)
    (display "no\n")
    (exit))
  (lambda ()
    (environment (quote $2))
    (display "yes\n")))
],,[if test "$nausicaa_ANSWER" = yes ; then
: dnl action if found.
$3
else
: dnl action if not found.
$4
fi
AC_MSG_RESULT([$nausicaa_ANSWER])
AC_SUBST([HAS_IKARUS_LIB_$1],[$nausicaa_ANSWER])
])
])
@end example

@noindent
and here is how we verify if @library{uriel ffi} is installed:

@example
NAUSICAA_IKARUS_CHECK_LIBRARY([URIEL_FFI],[(uriel ffi)])
@end example


@c page
@node conf scheme ypsilon
@section Running Ypsilon Scheme


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_WITH_OUTPUT_FROM_YPSILON_SCRIPT (@var{scheme_code}, @var{options}, @var{shell_chunk})
Evaluate @var{scheme_code} with Ypsilon by storing it in a temporary file
and invoking "@code{$@{YPSILON@} --r6rs-script} with additional command
line @var{options}.  Then, after the temporary file has been removed,
evaluate @var{shell_chunk}.

The script is expected to print a line of text on its standard output,
which will be stored in the shell variable @code{nausicaa_ANSWER}, so
that @var{shell_chunk} can examine it.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_YPSILON_CHECK_LIBRARY (@var{name}, @var{import_spec}, @var{action_if_found}, @var{action_if_not_found})
Attempt to find a Scheme library loadable by Ypsilon.

If the library is found the output variable
@code{HAS_YPSILON_LIB_@var{name}} is set to @code{yes}, otherwise it is
set to @code{no}.

The optional @var{action_if_found} is executed if the library was found.
The optional @var{action_if_not_found} is executed if the library was
not found.
@end deffn


As an example, here is the implementation of the macro above:

@example
AC_DEFUN([NAUSICAA_YPSILON_CHECK_LIBRARY],[
AC_MSG_CHECKING([availability of Ypsilon library $2])
NAUSICAA_WITH_OUTPUT_FROM_YPSILON_SCRIPT([(import (rnrs) (rnrs eval (6)))
(with-exception-handler
  (lambda (ex)
    (display "no\n")
    (exit))
  (lambda ()
    (environment (quote $2))
    (display "yes\n")))
],[--compatible],[if test "$nausicaa_ANSWER" = yes ; then
: dnl action if found.
$3
else
: dnl action if not found.
$4
fi
AC_MSG_RESULT([$nausicaa_ANSWER])
AC_SUBST([HAS_YPSILON_LIB_$1],[$nausicaa_ANSWER])
])
])
@end example

@noindent
and here is how we verify if @library{uriel ffi} is installed:

@example
NAUSICAA_YPSILON_CHECK_LIBRARY([URIEL_FFI],[(uriel ffi)])
@end example


@c page
@c @node conf scheme larceny
@c @section Running Larceny Scheme


@c @deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_WITH_OUTPUT_FROM_LARCENY_SCRIPT (@var{scheme_code}, @var{options}, @var{shell_chunk})
@c Evaluate @var{scheme_code} with Larceny by storing it in a temporary
@c file and invoking "@code{$@{LARCENY@} -r6rs -program} with additional
@c command line @var{options}.  Then, after the temporary file has been
@c removed, evaluate @var{shell_chunk}.

@c The script is expected to print a line of text on its standard output,
@c which will be stored in the shell variable @code{nausicaa_ANSWER}, so
@c that @var{shell_chunk} can examine it.
@c @end deffn


@c @deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_LARCENY_CHECK_LIBRARY (@var{name}, @var{import_spec}, @var{action_if_found}, @var{action_if_not_found})
@c Attempt to find a Scheme library loadable by Larceny.

@c If the library is found the output variable
@c @code{HAS_LARCENY_LIB_@var{name}} is set to @code{yes}, otherwise it is
@c set to @code{no}.

@c The optional @var{action_if_found} is executed if the library was found.
@c The optional @var{action_if_not_found} is executed if the library was
@c not found.
@c @end deffn


@c As an example, here is the implementation of the macro above:

@c @example
@c AC_DEFUN([NAUSICAA_LARCENY_CHECK_LIBRARY],[
@c AC_MSG_CHECKING([availability of Larceny library $2])
@c NAUSICAA_WITH_OUTPUT_FROM_LARCENY_SCRIPT([(import (rnrs) (rnrs eval (6)))
@c (with-exception-handler
@c   (lambda (ex)
@c     (display "no\n")
@c     (exit))
@c   (lambda ()
@c     (environment (quote $2))
@c     (display "yes\n")))
@c ],[--compatible],[if test "$nausicaa_ANSWER" = yes ; then
@c : dnl action if found.
@c $3
@c else
@c : dnl action if not found.
@c $4
@c fi
@c AC_MSG_RESULT([$nausicaa_ANSWER])
@c AC_SUBST([HAS_LARCENY_LIB_$1],[$nausicaa_ANSWER])
@c ])
@c ])
@c @end example

@c @noindent
@c and here is how we verify if @library{uriel ffi} is installed:

@c @example
@c NAUSICAA_LARCENY_CHECK_LIBRARY([URIEL_FFI],[(uriel ffi)])
@c @end example


@c page
@node conf clang
@chapter Macros for C language


@menu
* conf clang setup::            Setting up the C language environment.
* conf clang basics::           Basic tests.
* conf clang common::           Common groups of tests.
@end menu


@c page
@node conf clang setup
@section Setting up the C language environment


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_SYSTEM_SETUP
Setup what is needed to inspect the system.  Useful (but probably not
mandatory) when we need to use the C compiler to inspect system
facilities; not needed in the other cases.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_C_LANGUAGE
Setup the C language environment.  Mandtory when we need to use the C
compiler to inspect system and libraries facilities.
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf clang basics
@section Basic tests


@menu
* conf clang basics includes::  Including header files.
* conf clang basics valueof::   Determining the value of expressions.
* conf clang basics sizeof::    Determining the size of data types.
* conf clang basics typeof::    Determining the basic type of data types.
* conf clang basics alignof::   Determining the alignment of data types.
* conf clang basics strideof::  Determining the array stride of data types.
* conf clang basics offsetof::  Determining the offset of fields in data
                                structures.
* conf clang basics access::    Determining the accessors of data types.
* conf clang basics inspect::   Full inspection of data types.
@end menu


@c page
@node conf clang basics includes
@subsection Including header files


@defvar NAUSICAA_INCLUDES_DEFAULT (@var{headers})
Expands to the specification of C language headers inclusion.  Its value
is:

@example
AC_INCLUDES_DEFAULT
#ifdef HAVE_ERRNO_H
#  include <errno.h>
#endif
#ifdef HAVE_FCNTL_H
#  include <fcntl.h>
#endif
#ifdef HAVE_INTTYPES_H
#  include <inttypes.h>
#endif
#ifdef HAVE_LIMITS_H
#  include <limits.h>
#endif
#ifdef HAVE_STDINT_H
#  include <stdint.h>
#endif
#ifdef HAVE_UNISTD_H
#  include <unistd.h>
#endif
@end example

@noindent
and additionally the optional @var{headers} are included.
@code{AC_INCLUDES_DEFAULT} is defined by Autoconf, @autoconfref{Default
Includes,Default Includes}
@end defvar


@c page
@node conf clang basics valueof
@subsection Determining the value of expressions


It is often needed to know the value of a C language expression.  The
following acquires the value of @code{INT_MAX} (defined in
@file{limits.h}) and assigns it to the output variable
@code{VALUEOF_INT_MAX}:

@example
NAUSICAA_VALUEOF_TEST([INT_MAX],[INT_MAX])
@end example

@noindent
while the following acquires the offset of the field @code{l_start} in
the structure @code{struct flock} (defined in @file{fcntl.h}):

@example
NAUSICAA_VALUEOF_TEST([OFFSETOF_STRUCT_FLOCK_L_START],
   [offsetof(struct flock,l_start)])
@end example


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_VALUEOF_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{expr}, @var{default}, @var{headers})
A wrapper for the Autoconf macro @code{AC_COMPUTE_INT} that acquires the
value of a C language expression, which must be an integer.

The output variable @code{VALUEOF_<@var{suffix}>} is set to the result.
If the test fails: the value of the output variable will be
@var{default}, or @false{} if @var{default} is not given.

The optional @var{headers} must be a chunk of code including header
files.  By default the expansion of @code{NAUSICAA_INCLUDES_DEFAULT} is
included in the test program.
@end deffn




@c page
@node conf clang basics sizeof
@subsection Determining the size of data types


It is often needed to know the size of a C language data type.  The
following determines the size in bytes of @code{unsigned int} and
assigns it to the output variable @code{SIZEOF_UINT}:

@example
NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST([UINT],[unsigned int])
@end example

@noindent
the following determines the size of the field @code{l_start} in the
structure @code{struct flock} (defined in @file{fcntl.h}) and stores it
in the output variable @code{SIZEOF_STRUCT_FLOCK_L_START}:

@example
NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_FIELD_TEST([OFFSETOF_STRUCT_FLOCK_L_START],
   [struct flock],
   [l_start])
@end example


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef}, @var{default}, @var{headers})
A wrapper for the Autoconf macro @code{AC_COMPUTE_INT} that acquires the
size of a C language type.

The output variable @code{SIZEOF_<@var{suffix}>} will be set to the
result.  If the test fails the value of the output variable will be
@var{default}, or @false{} if @var{default} is not given.

The optional @var{headers} must be a chunk of code including header
files.  By default the expansion of @code{NAUSICAA_INCLUDES_DEFAULT} is
included in the test program.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_FIELD_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{struct}, @var{field}, @var{default}, @var{headers})
A wrapper for the Autoconf macro @code{AC_COMPUTE_INT} that acquires the
size of the field of a C language structure type.

The output variable @code{SIZEOF_<@var{suffix}>} will be set to the
result.  If the test fails the value of the output variable will be
@var{default}, or @false{} if @var{default} is not given.

@var{struct} must be the type of the structure, usable in a variable
declaration.  @var{field} must be the name of the field.

The optional @var{headers} must be a chunk of code including header
files.  By default the expansion of @code{NAUSICAA_INCLUDES_DEFAULT} is
included in the test program.
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf clang basics typeof
@subsection Determining the basic type of data types


It is often needed to know the basic type of a derived or custom C
language data type.  The following determines the type of @code{ssize_t}
(knowing that it is an unsigned integer) and assigns it to the output
variable @code{TYPEOF_SSIZE_T}:

@example
NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST([SIZE_T],[ssize_t])
NAUSICAA_INTTYPE_TEST([SIZE_T],[ssize_t])
@end example

@noindent
the following determines the type of @code{size_t} (knowing that it is a
signed integer) and assigns it to the output variable
@code{TYPEOF_SIZE_T}:

@example
NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST([SIZE_T],[size_t])
NAUSICAA_UINTTYPE_TEST([SIZE_T],[size_t])
@end example

@noindent
and the following does the same as the above:

@example
NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST([SIZE_T],[size_t])
NAUSICAA_BASE_TYPE_TEST([SIZE_T],[size_t],[signed-int])
@end example


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_BASE_TYPE_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef}, @var{type-guess})
Determine the equivalent basic type of the C language type
@var{typedef}.  This is a wrapper for the macros described below, to
which the @var{suffix} and @var{typedef} arguments are handed unchanged.

@var{type-guess} selects which macro to use:

@table @code
@item signed-int
selects @code{NAUSICAA_INTTYPE_TEST};

@item unsigned-int
selects @code{NAUSICAA_UINTTYPE_TEST};

@item float
selects @code{NAUSICAA_FLOATTYPE_TEST}.
@end table

@code{pointer} is a special value of @var{type-guess} that selects no
macro but sets the output variable @code{TYPEOF_<@var{suffix}>} to
@code{pointer}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_INTTYPE_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef})
Determine the equivalent basic integer type of the C language type
@var{typedef} among the set:

@example
char
short int
int
long
long long
@end example

The output variable @code{TYPEOF_<@var{suffix}>} is set to a result
among:

@example
signed-char
signed-int
signed-short
signed-long
signed-long-long
@end example

If the test fails: the output variable is set to @false{}.

The search is performed by comparing the value of the variable
@code{SIZEOF_<@var{suffix}>} with the values of the variables:

@example
SIZEOF_CHAR
SIZEOF_INT
SIZEOF_SHORT_INT
SIZEOF_LONG
SIZEOF_LLONG
@end example

@noindent
defined by the macro @code{NAUSICAA_SIZEOF}.
@code{SIZEOF_<@var{suffix}>} must have been set in precedence using the
macro @code{NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST} or an equivalent macro.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_UINTTYPE_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef})
Determine the equivalent basic unsigned integer type of the C language
type @var{typedef} among the set:

@example
unsigned char
unsigned short int
unsigned int
unsigned long
unsigned long long
@end example

The output variable @code{TYPEOF_<@var{suffix}>} is set to a result
among:

@example
unsigned-char
unsigned-int
unsigned-short
unsigned-long
unsigned-long-long
@end example

If the test fails: the output variable is set to @false{}.

The search is performed by comparing the value of the variable
@code{SIZEOF_<@var{suffix}>} with the values of the variables:

@example
SIZEOF_CHAR
SIZEOF_UINT
SIZEOF_SHORT_UINT
SIZEOF_ULONG
SIZEOF_ULLONG
@end example

@noindent
defined by the macro @code{NAUSICAA_SIZEOF}.
@code{SIZEOF_<@var{suffix}>} must have been set in precedence using the
macro @code{NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST} or an equivalent macro.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_FLOATTYPE_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef})
Determine the equivalent basic floating point type of the C language
type @var{typedef} among the set:

@example
float
double
long double
@end example

The output variable @code{TYPEOF_<@var{suffix}>} is set to a result
among:

@example
float
double
long-double
@end example

If the test fails: the output variable is set to @false{}.

The search is performed by comparing the value of the variable
@code{SIZEOF_<@var{suffix}>} with the values of the variables:

@example
SIZEOF_FLOAT
SIZEOF_DOUBLE
SIZEOF_LONG_DOUBLE
@end example

@noindent
defined by the macro @code{NAUSICAA_SIZEOF}.
@code{SIZEOF_<@var{suffix}>} must have been set in precedence using the
macro @code{NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST} or an equivalent macro.
@end deffn



@c page
@node conf clang basics alignof
@subsection Determining the alignment of data types


It is sometimes needed to know the alignment of a C language data types.
The following determines the alignment in bytes of @code{unsigned int}
and assigns it to the output variable @code{ALIGNOF_UINT}:

@example
NAUSICAA_ALIGNOF_TEST([UINT],[unsigned int])
@end example


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_ALIGNOF_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef}, @var{default}, @var{headers})
Acquire the align of a C language type.

The output variable @code{ALIGNOF_<@var{suffix}>} will be set to the
result.  If the test fails the value of the output variable will be
@var{default}, or @false{} if @var{default} is not given.

The optional @var{headers} must be a chunk of code including header
files.  By default the expansion of @code{NAUSICAA_INCLUDES_DEFAULT} is
included in the test program.
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf clang basics strideof
@subsection Determining the array stride of data types


When accessing a block of memory as an array of values of a given data
type, we must know the stride of the elements: the number of bytes
between the first byte of an element and the first byte of the next.
The following determines the stride in bytes of @code{unsigned int} and
assigns it to the output variable @code{STRIDEOF_UINT}:

@example
NAUSICAA_STRIDEOF_TEST([UINT],[unsigned int])
@end example


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_STRIDEOF_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef}, @var{default}, @var{headers})
Acquire the stride of a C language type.

The output variable @code{STRIDEOF_<@var{suffix}>} will be set to the
result.  If the test fails the value of the output variable will be
@var{default}, or @false{} if @var{default} is not given.

The optional @var{headers} must be a chunk of code including header
files.  By default the expansion of @code{NAUSICAA_INCLUDES_DEFAULT} is
included in the test program.
@end deffn

@c page
@node conf clang basics offsetof
@subsection Determining the offset of fields in data structures


It is often needed to know the offset of a field in a C language data
structure.  From a pointer to the first byte of a data structure and the
offset of one of its fields, we can compute the pointer to the first
byte of the fields by adding the two.

The following determines the offset of the field @code{l_start} in the
structure @code{struct flock} (defined in @file{fcntl.h}) and stores it
in the output variable @code{OFFSETOF_STRUCT_FLOCK_L_START}:

@example
NAUSICAA_OFFSETOF_FIELD_TEST([OFFSETOF_STRUCT_FLOCK_L_START],
   [struct flock],
   [l_start])
@end example

@noindent
the following does the same for the @code{l_whence} field and stores it
in the output variable @code{OFFSETOF_STRUCT_FLOCK_L_WHENCE}:

@example
NAUSICAA_OFFSETOF_FIELD_TEST([OFFSETOF_STRUCT_FLOCK_L_WHENCE],
   [struct flock],
   [l_whence])
@end example


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_OFFSETOF_FIELD_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{struct}, @var{field}, @var{headers})
A wrapper for the Autoconf macro @code{AC_COMPUTE_INT} that acquires the
offset of a field in a C data structure.

@var{struct} is the type of the structure, @var{field} is the name of
the field.

The output variable @code{OFFSETOF_<@var{SUFFIX}>} is set to the result.
If the test fails the value of the output variable will be @false{}.

The optional @var{headers} must be a chunk of code including header
files.  By default the expansion of @code{NAUSICAA_INCLUDES_DEFAULT} is
included in the test program.
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf clang basics access
@subsection Determining the accessors of data types


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_ACCESSORS_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef})
Expands to:

@example
NAUSICAA_GETTER_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef})
NAUSICAA_SETTER_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef})
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_GETTER_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef})
Determines the getter to be used for the C language type @var{typedef}.

The output variable @code{GETTEROF_<@var{suffix}>} is set to the name of
the getter, which will be one among:

@example
pointer-ref-c-signed-char
pointer-ref-c-unsigned-char
pointer-ref-c-signed-int
pointer-ref-c-unsigned-int
pointer-ref-c-signed-short
pointer-ref-c-unsigned-short
pointer-ref-c-signed-long
pointer-ref-c-unsigned-long
pointer-ref-c-signed-long-long
pointer-ref-c-unsigned-long-long
pointer-ref-c-float
pointer-ref-c-double
pointer-ref-c-long-double
pointer-ref-c-pointer
@end example

@noindent
if the test fails: the output variable will be set to @false{}.

The search is performed by comparing the value of the variable
@code{TYPEOF_<@var{suffix}>} with the values:

@example
signed-char             unsigned-char
signed-short            unsigned-short
signed-int              unsigned-int
signed-long             unsigned-long
signed-long-long        unsigned-long-long
float                   double
long-double             pointer
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_SETTER_TEST (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef})
Determines the setter to be used for the C language type @var{typedef}.

The output variable @code{SETTEROF_<@var{suffix}>} is set to the name of
the setter, which will be one among:

@example
pointer-set-c-char
pointer-set-c-int
pointer-set-c-short
pointer-set-c-long
pointer-set-c-long-long
pointer-set-c-float
pointer-set-c-double
pointer-set-c-long-double
pointer-set-c-pointer
@end example

@noindent
if the test fails: the output variable will be set to @false{}.

The search is performed by comparing the value of the variable
@code{TYPEOF_<@var{suffix}>} with the values:

@example
signed-char             unsigned-char
signed-short            unsigned-short
signed-int              unsigned-int
signed-long             unsigned-long
signed-long-long        unsigned-long-long
float                   double
long-double             pointer
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node conf clang basics inspect
@subsection Full inspection of data types


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_INSPECT_TYPE (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef}, @var{type-guess}, @var{default}, @var{headers})
Perform a full inspection for a C language type definition.  This macro
is a wrapper for other more basic macros, and it expands to:

@example
NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef},@var{default},@var{headers})
NAUSICAA_ALIGNOF_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef},@var{default},@var{headers})
NAUSICAA_STRIDEOF_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef},@var{default},@var{headers})
NAUSICAA_BASE_TYPE_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef},@var{type-guess})
NAUSICAA_ACCESSORS_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef})
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_INSPECT_STRUCT_TYPE (@var{suffix}, @var{typedef}, @var{default}, @var{headers})
Perform a full inspection for a C language structure type definition.
This macro is a wrapper for other more basic macros, and it expands to:

@example
NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef},@var{default},@var{headers})
NAUSICAA_ALIGNOF_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef},@var{default},@var{headers})
NAUSICAA_STRIDEOF_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{typedef},@var{default},@var{headers})
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_INSPECT_FIELD_TYPE (@var{suffix}, @var{struct-typedef}, @var{field-name}, @var{type-guess}, @var{default}, @var{headers})
Perform a full inspection for a C language field structure type
definition.  This macro is a wrapper for other more basic macros, and it
expands to:

@example
NAUSICAA_OFFSETOF_FIELD_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{struct-typedef},@var{field-name},@var{headers})
NAUSICAA_SIZEOF_FIELD_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{struct-typedef},@var{field-name},@var{default},@var{headers})
NAUSICAA_BASE_TYPE_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{struct-typedef}.@var{field-name},@var{type-guess})
NAUSICAA_ACCESSORS_TEST(@var{suffix},@var{struct-typedef}.@var{field-name})
@end example
@end deffn



@c page
@node conf clang common
@section Common groups of tests


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_SIZEOF
Perform tests to determine the size (the number of bytes) of the common
C language types.  The following output variables are defined:

@multitable {SIZEOF_SHORT_UINT} {unsigned long long}
@headitem Variable @tab C type
@item SIZEOF_SHORT_INT
@tab short int
@item SIZEOF_SHORT_UINT
@tab unsigned short int
@item SIZEOF_INT
@tab int
@item SIZEOF_UINT
@tab unsigned int
@item SIZEOF_LONG
@tab long
@item SIZEOF_ULONG
@tab unsigned long
@item SIZEOF_LLONG
@tab long long
@item SIZEOF_ULLONG
@tab unsigned long long
@item SIZEOF_FLOAT
@tab float
@item SIZEOF_DOUBLE
@tab double
@item SIZEOF_POINTER
@tab void *
@end multitable
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_C_TYPES_LIMITS
Perform tests to determine the value of limits for the common C language
types.  The following output variables are defined:

@multitable {VALUEOF_ULLONG_MAX} {Original C expression}
@headitem Variable @tab Original C expression
@item VALUEOF_CHAR_MAX
@tab CHAR_MAX
@item VALUEOF_CHAR_MIN
@tab CHAR_MIN
@item VALUEOF_SCHAR_MAX
@tab SCHAR_MAX
@item VALUEOF_SCHAR_MIN
@tab SCHAR_MIN
@item VALUEOF_UCHAR_MAX
@tab UCHAR_MAX
@item VALUEOF_SHRT_MAX
@tab SHRT_MAX
@item VALUEOF_SHRT_MIN
@tab SHRT_MIN
@item VALUEOF_USHRT_MAX
@tab USHRT_MAX
@item VALUEOF_INT_MAX
@tab INT_MAX
@item VALUEOF_INT_MIN
@tab INT_MIN
@item VALUEOF_UINT_MAX
@tab UINT_MAX
@item VALUEOF_LONG_MAX
@tab LONG_MAX
@item VALUEOF_LONG_MIN
@tab LONG_MIN
@item VALUEOF_ULONG_MAX
@tab ULONG_MAX
@item VALUEOF_LLONG_MAX
@tab LLONG_MAX
@item VALUEOF_LLONG_MIN
@tab LLONG_MIN
@item VALUEOF_ULLONG_MAX
@tab ULLONG_MAX
@item VALUEOF_WCHAR_MAX
@tab WCHAR_MAX
@item VALUEOF_SSIZE_MAX
@tab SSIZE_MAX
@end multitable

Additionally the output variable @code{WORDS_BIGENDIAN} is set to
@true{} if the underlying platform is big endian, to @false{} otherwise.
@end deffn


@deffn {Autoconf Macro} NAUSICAA_C_ERRNO
Perform tests to determine the value of all the known @code{errno}
predefined values.  The following output variables are defined:

@example
EPERM           ENOENT          ESRCH           EINTR
EIO             ENXIO           E2BIG           ENOEXEC
EBADF           ECHILD          EAGAIN          ENOMEM
EACCES          EFAULT          ENOTBLK         EBUSY
EEXIST          EXDEV           ENODEV          ENOTDIR
EISDIR          EINVAL          ENFILE          EMFILE
ENOTTY          ETXTBSY         EFBIG           ENOSPC
ESPIPE          EROFS           EMLINK          EPIPE
EDOM            ERANGE          EDEADLK         ENAMETOOLONG
ENOLCK          ENOSYS          ENOTEMPTY       ELOOP
EWOULDBLOCK     ENOMSG          EIDRM           ECHRNG
EL2NSYNC        EL3HLT          EL3RST          ELNRNG
EUNATCH         ENOCSI          EL2HLT          EBADE
EBADR           EXFULL          ENOANO          EBADRQC
EBADSLT         EDEADLOCK       EBFONT          ENOSTR
ENODATA         ETIME           ENOSR           ENONET
ENOPKG          EREMOTE         ENOLINK         EADV
ESRMNT          ECOMM           EPROTO          EMULTIHOP
EDOTDOT         EBADMSG         EOVERFLOW       ENOTUNIQ
EBADFD          EREMCHG         ELIBACC         ELIBBAD
ELIBSCN         ELIBMAX         ELIBEXEC        EILSEQ
ERESTART        ESTRPIPE        EUSERS          ENOTSOCK
EDESTADDRREQ    EMSGSIZE        EPROTOTYPE      ENOPROTOOPT
EPROTONOSUPPORT ESOCKTNOSUPPORT EOPNOTSUPP      EPFNOSUPPORT
EAFNOSUPPORT    EADDRINUSE      EADDRNOTAVAIL   ENETDOWN
ENETUNREACH     ENETRESET       ECONNABORTED    ECONNRESET
ENOBUFS         EISCONN         ENOTCONN        ESHUTDOWN
ETOOMANYREFS    ETIMEDOUT       ECONNREFUSED    EHOSTDOWN
EHOSTUNREACH    EALREADY        EINPROGRESS     ESTALE
EUCLEAN         ENOTNAM         ENAVAIL         EISNAM
EREMOTEIO       EDQUOT          ENOMEDIUM       EMEDIUMTYPE
ECANCELED       ENOKEY          EKEYEXPIRED     EKEYREVOKED
EKEYREJECTED    EOWNERDEAD      ENOTRECOVERABLE
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node vars
@chapter Variables


This chapter documents the variables in the @file{Makefile}
infrastructure.


@menu
* vars config::                 Configuration variables.
* vars project::                Project related variables.
* vars package::                Binary package variables.
* vars directories::            Directory variables.
* vars misc::                   Miscellaneous variables.
@end menu


@c page
@node vars config
@section Configuration variables


@defvar nausicaa_ENABLE_IKARUS
@defvarx nausicaa_ENABLE_YPSILON
@c @defvarx nausicaa_ENABLE_LARCENY
Enable/disable the usage of the named Scheme implementation.  If set to
@code{yes}, the implementation is enabled.
@end defvar


@defvar nausicaa_ENABLE_SLS
Enable or disable the installation of source files; valid values are
@code{yes} and @code{no}.  The default is @code{yes}.

It is set by the @command{configure} options @option{--enable-sls} and
@option{--disable-sls}.
@end defvar


@defvar nausicaa_ENABLE_FASL
Enable or disable compilation and installation of @fasl{} files; valid
values are @code{yes} and @code{no}.  The default is @code{no}.

It is set by the @command{configure} options @option{--enable-fasl} and
@option{--disable-fasl}.
@end defvar


@defvar nausicaa_ENABLE_DOC
Enable or disable compilation and installation of documentation files;
valid values are @code{yes} and @code{no}.  The default is @code{yes}.

It is set by the @command{configure} options @option{--enable-doc} and
@option{--disable-doc}.
@end defvar


@defvar nausicaa_ENABLE_DOC_INFO
Enable or disable compilation and installation of Info documentation
files; valid values are @code{yes} and @code{no}.  The default is
@code{yes}.

It is set by the @command{configure} options @option{--enable-doc-info}
and @option{--disable-doc-info}.
@end defvar


@defvar nausicaa_ENABLE_DOC_HTML
Enable or disable compilation and installation of @acronym{HTML}
documentation files; valid values are @code{yes} and @code{no}.  The
default is @code{no}.

It is set by the @command{configure} options @option{--enable-doc-html}
and @option{--disable-doc-html}.
@end defvar


@defvar nausicaa_COMPRESSOR
Select the compressor to be used when creating a tarball; it is used by
the binary distribution rules.

Supported values:

@table @code
@item bzip2
selects the Bzip2 compressor;

@item gzip
selects the Gzip compressor;
@end table

@noindent
if a different value is set, the compressor will default to
@code{gzip}.  The default value is @code{gzip}.
@end defvar


@c page
@node vars project
@section Project related variables


@defvar PACKAGE_NAME
The name of the project; it is used to compose the name of binary
distribution packages.

It is set by the @command{configure} script.
@end defvar


@defvar PACKAGE_VERSION
The version specification of the project; it is used to compose the name
of binary distribution packages.

It is set by the @command{configure} script.
@end defvar


@defvar PKG_ID
An identifier composed using the package name and version.

It is set by the @command{configure} script, and its value should be:

@example
$(PACKAGE_NAME)-$(PACKAGE_VERSION)
@end example
@end defvar


@c page
@node vars package
@section Binary package variables


@defvr {Customisable Variable} package_BUILD_VERSION
A special version specification to tag binary distribution packages.  It
should be used to give a version to the package file.

It defaults to @code{1nau}, which means ``Nausicaa build version 1''.
The default can be overridden from the command line of @command{make},
for example:

@example
$ make bindist package_BUILD_VERSION=1mm
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Customisable Variable} package_ARCH
Architecture specification to be used to tag binary distribution
packages.  It should be used to identify the architecture for which a
package file was built.

It must be set to a meaningful value, like @code{i486} or @code{i686}.
The default value is computed with the following @gnu{} Make expression:

@example
$(firstword $(subst -, ,$(shell ../../infrastructure/config.guess)))
@end example

@noindent
if it expands to the empty strings, it falls back to @code{noarch},
which means that the package holds only architecture independent files
(like source and documentation files).

The automatically computed value can be overridden from the command line
of @command{make}, for example:

@example
$ make bindist package_ARCH=sparc
@end example
@end defvr


@defvar package_NAME
@defvarx package_VERSION
These are aliases for @code{PACKAGE_NAME} and @code{PACKAGE_VERSION},
and are used to compose the name of binary distribution files.
@end defvar


@defvar package_PREFIX
The file name of binary distribution packages, without extension.  It
is set to:

@example
$(package_NAME)-$(package_VERSION)-$(package_ARCH)-$(package_BUILD_VERSION)
@end example

As a usage example, Slackware packages have name:

@example
$(package_PREFIX).tgz
@end example
@end defvar


@c page
@node vars directories
@section Directory variables


@defvar srcdir
The pathname of the top source directory of a Nausicaa project.

The rules of the @file{Makefile} will assume that this is a relative
directory pathname, and the full pathname can be built with:
@code{$(PWD)/$(srcdir)}.

It is set by the @command{configure} script.
@end defvar


@defvar builddir
The pathname of the top build directory of a Nausicaa project.  It is
meant to be the directory from which we have invoked the
@command{configure} script.

The rules of the @file{Makefile} will assume that this is a relative
directory pathname, and the full pathname can be built with:
@code{$(PWD)/$(builddir)}.

It is set by the @command{configure} script.
@end defvar


@menu
* vars directories common::    Common installation directories.
* vars directories custom::    Custom installation directories.
@end menu


@c page
@node vars directories common
@subsection Common installation directories


These are the standard @gnu{} Autoconf variables used to install files
on the system.  All of them are set by the @command{configure} script.


@defvar prefix
The root of the installation directories.
@end defvar


@defvar exec_prefix
The installation prefix for architecture--dependent files.
@end defvar


@defvar bindir
The directories for installing executables that users run.
@end defvar


@defvar datarootdir
The root of the directory tree for read--only architecture--independent
data files.
@end defvar


@defvar datadir
The directory for installing idiosyncratic read--only
architecture--independent data.
@end defvar


@defvar docdir
The directory for installing documentation files (other than Info and
man).
@end defvar


@defvar includedir
The directory for installing C header files.
@end defvar


@defvar infodir
The directory for installing documentation in Info format.
@end defvar


@defvar libdir
The directory for installing object code libraries.
@end defvar


@defvar libexecdir
The directory for installing executables that other programs run.
@end defvar


@defvar localstatedir
The directory for installing locale--dependent but
architecture--independent data, such as message catalogs.  This
directory usually has a subdirectory per locale.
@end defvar


@defvar mandir
The top--level directory for installing documentation in man format.
@end defvar


@defvar sbindir
The directory for installing executables that system administrators run.
@end defvar


@defvar sharedstatedir
The directory for installing modifiable architecture--independent data.
@end defvar


@defvar sysconfdir
The directory for installing read--only single--machine data.
@end defvar


@c page
@node vars directories custom
@subsection Custom installation directories


These are the custom variables used to install files on the system.
With the exception of @code{ikarus_PKGLIBDIR}, all of them are set by
the @command{configure} script.


@defvar PKG_DIR
A project specific directory name that is used to compose other
directory pathnames.  It is set to:

@example
$(PACKAGE_NAME)/$(PACKAGE_VERSION)
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar pkgdatadir
Project specific directory for data files.
@end defvar


@defvar pkgdocdir
Project specific directory for documentation files.
@end defvar

@defvar pkgexampledir
Project specific directory for example files.
@end defvar

@defvar pkginfodir
Project specific directory for documentation files in Info format.
@end defvar

@defvar pkghtmldir
Project specific directory for documentation files in @acronym{HTML}
format.
@end defvar

@defvar pkgincludedir
Project specific directory for C language header files.
@end defvar

@defvar pkglibdir
Project specific directory for library files.  This is where the source
and precompiled Scheme libraries end up.  It defaults to
@code{$(libdir)/scheme} and can be overridden from the command line of
@command{make}, for example:

@example
$ make bindist pkglibdir=/usr/local/lib/ikarus
@end example
@end defvar

@defvar pkglibexecdir
Project specific directory for executable files.
@end defvar


@defvar pkgsysconfdir
Project specific directory for system configuration files.
@end defvar


@c page
@node vars misc
@section Miscellaneous variables


@defvar TMPDIR
System environment variable that selects the root directory for
temporary files.  It is used to build binary distribution packages.  If
not set or set to the empty string: it defaults to @file{/tmp}.
@end defvar


@defvar DESTDIR
A directory to be prepended to all the installation pathnames.  It
allows installation into a temporary location.  Example:

@example
$ make install DESTDIR=/tmp/marco/nausicaa-scmobj
@end example

@noindent
install all the directories and files under the directory
@file{/tmp/marco/nausicaa-scmobj}.
@end defvar


@c page
@node rules
@chapter Rules


@menu
* rules main::                  Main rules.
* rules uninstall::             Uninstallation script.
* rules doc::                   Documentation related rules.
* rules sls::                   Handling source files.
* rules fasl::                  Handling precompiled files.
* rules texinfo::               Documentation in Texinfo format.
* rules test::                  Testing libraries.
* rules inspect::               Inspecting variables.
@end menu


@c page
@node rules main
@section Main rules


@subsubheading Making


@deffn {Makefile Rule} all
Build everything that the project was configured to build.  To be
invoked as:

@example
$ make all
@end example

This is the first rule in the @file{Makefile}, so it can be invoked also
by running @command{make} without rule arguments.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Cleaning


@deffn {Makefile Rule} clean
Remove all the files that were built with the @code{all} rule.  To be invoked
as:

@example
$ make clean
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} realclean
Remove all the files that were built with the @code{all} rule.  To be
invoked as:

@example
$ make realclean
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} clean-builddir
Remove everything in the build directory and its subdirectories:
@strong{use with care!!!}  To be invoked in a safe place as:

@example
$ make clean-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Installation


For all the following rules: root privileges may be needed to install
and uninstall files on the system; so we may want to use a tool like
@command{sudo} to run @command{make}.  In the following we will assume
that this is the case.


@deffn {Makefile Rule} install
Install on the system all the files that the project was configured to
install.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make install
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} uninstall
Uninstall from the system all the files that the project was configured
to install.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make uninstall
@end example

The uninstallation is done by running an automatically generated
uninstall script.  @ref{rules uninstall,uninstall-script-run}
@end deffn


@c page
@node rules uninstall
@section Uninstallation script


@subsubheading Making and cleaning


@deffn {Makefile Rule} uninstall-script
Build the uninstall script.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make uninstall-script
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{all}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} uninstall-script-clean
Remove all the files created by @code{uninstall-script}.  To be invoked
as:

@example
$ make uninstall-script-clean
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{clean}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} uninstall-script-builddir
Create the build directory for the uninstall script.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make uninstall-script-builddir
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{uninstall-script}.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Installation


For all the following rules: root privileges may be needed to install
and uninstall files on the system; so we may want to use a tool like
@command{sudo} to run @command{make}.  In the following we will assume
that this is the case.


@deffn {Makefile Rule} uninstall-script-install
Install the uninstall script.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make uninstall-script-install
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{install}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} uninstall-script-uninstall
Uninstall the uninstall script.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make uninstall-script-uninstall
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{uninstall}.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Running


@deffn {Makefile Rule} uninstall-script-run
Run the uninstall script, uninstalling files.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make uninstall-script-run
@end example

Root privileges may be needed to install and uninstall files on the
system; so we may want to use a tool like @command{sudo} to run
@command{make}.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Variables


@defvar uninstall_script_BUILDDIR
The directory in which the uninstall script is built.  It defaults to
@code{$(builddir)/uninstall.d}.
@end defvar


@defvar uninstall_script_TARGET
The pathname of the uninstall script.  It defaults to:

@example
$(uninstall_script_BUILDDIR)/uninstall.sh
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar uninstall_script_INSTDIR
The installation directory for the uninstall script.  It defaults to
@code{$(pkglibexecdir)}.
@end defvar


@c page
@node rules doc
@section Documentation related rules


Compilation, installation and uninstallation are enabled or disabled
with configuration options and variables.  @ref{conf options,
enable-doc}  @ref{vars config,enable_doc}


@subsubheading Making and cleaning


@deffn {Makefile Rule} doc
Build all the documentation that the project was configured to build.
To be invoked as:

@example
$ make doc
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{all}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} doc-clean
Remove all the files that were built by the @code{doc} rule.  To be
invoked as:

@example
$ make doc-clean
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{clean}.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Installation


For all the following rules: root privileges may be needed to install
and uninstall files on the system; so we may want to use a tool like
@command{sudo} to run @command{make}.  In the following we will assume
that this is the case.


@deffn {Makefile Rule} doc-install
Install all the documentation that the project was configured to build.
To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make doc-install
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{install}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} doc-uninstall
Uninstall all the documentation that the project was configured to
build.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make doc-uninstall
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node rules sls
@section Handling source files


@subsubheading Installation


For all the following rules:

@itemize
@item
Installation and uninstallation are enabled or disabled with
configuration options and variables. @ref{conf options, enable-sls}
@ref{vars config, enable_sls}

@item
Root privileges may be needed to install and uninstall files on the
system; so we may want to use a tool like @command{sudo} to run
@command{make}; in the following we will assume that this is the case.
@end itemize


@deffn {Makefile Rule} sls-install
Install the Scheme source files.  All the files with extension
@code{.sls} in the @file{libraries} subdirectory of the project are
installed on the system.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make sls-install
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{install}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} sls-uninstall
Uninstall the Scheme source files.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make sls-uninstall
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node rules fasl
@section Handling precompiled files


Compilation, installation and uninstallation are enabled or disabled
with configuration options and variables.  @ref{conf options,
enable-fasl}  @ref{vars config, enable_fasl}

Producing precompiled library files is a multistep process:

@enumerate
@item
the source files are duplicated under the build directory, preserving
the directory structure;

@item
the library files are built by running the command:

@example
ikarus --compile-dependencies ../libraries/compile-all.sps
@end example

@noindent
with a system environment that allows Ikarus to find the relevant
libraries.
@end enumerate


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Making and cleaning


@deffn {Makefile Rule} fasl
Compile the library files.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make fasl
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{all}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} fasl-clean
Remove all the compiled files.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make fasl-clean
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{clean}.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Installation


For all the following rules: root privileges may be needed to install
and uninstall files on the system; so we may want to use a tool like
@command{sudo} to run @command{make}; in the following we will assume
that this is the case.


@deffn {Makefile Rule} fasl-install
Install the precompiled library files.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make fasl-install
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{install}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} fasl-uninstall
Uninstall the precompiled files.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make fasl-uninstall
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node rules texinfo
@section Documentation in Texinfo format


Texinfo is the standard documentation format for Nausicaa projects.  By
default only the Info documentation is built and installed.
Compilation, installation and uninstallation are enabled or disabled
with configuration options and variables.  @ref{conf
options,enable-doc-info} @ref{vars config,enable_doc_info}


@subsubheading Making and cleaning


@deffn {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo
@deffnx {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-info
@deffnx {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-html
@code{doc-texinfo} builds the Texinfo documentation that the project was
configured to build.  @code{doc-texinfo-info} and
@code{doc-texinfo-html} build Info and @acronym{HTML} documentation,
according to the configuration.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make doc-texinfo
$ make doc-texinfo-info
$ make doc-texinfo-html
@end example

@code{doc-texinfo} is invoked by @code{doc}.  @code{doc-texinfo-info}
and @code{doc-texinfo-html} are invoked by @code{doc-texinfo}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-clean
Remove all the files that were built by the @code{doc-texinfo} rule.  To
be invoked as:

@example
$ make doc-texinfo-clean
@end example

This rule is invoked by @code{doc-clean}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-builddir
If the build directory for Texinfo documentation does not exist: create
it.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make doc-texinfo-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Installation


For all the following rules: root privileges may be needed to install
and uninstall files on the system; so we may want to use a tool like
@command{sudo} to run @command{make}.  In the following we will assume
that this is the case.


@deffn {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-install
@deffnx {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-info-install
@deffnx {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-html-install
Install all the Texinfo documentation that the project was configured to
build.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make doc-texinfo-install
$ sudo make doc-texinfo-info-install
$ sudo make doc-texinfo-html-install
@end example

@code{doc-texinfo-install} is invoked by @code{doc-install}.
@code{doc-texinfo-info-install} and @code{doc-texinfo-html-install} are
invoked by @code{doc-texinfo-install}.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-uninstall
@deffnx {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-info-uninstall
@deffnx {Makefile Rule} doc-texinfo-html-uninstall
Uninstall all the documentation that the project was configured to
build.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make doc-texinfo-uninstall
$ sudo make doc-texinfo-info-uinstall
$ sudo make doc-texinfo-html-uinstall
@end example

@code{doc-texinfo-uinstall} is invoked by @code{doc-uinstall}.
@code{doc-texinfo-info-uinstall} and @code{doc-texinfo-html-uinstall}
are invoked by @code{doc-texinfo-uinstall}.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Variables


@defvar doc_texinfo_SRCDIR
The pathname of the source directory for Texinfo files.
@end defvar


@defvar doc_texinfo_BUILDDIR
The pathname of the build directory for Texinfo documentation.
@end defvar


@defvar doc_texinfo_SOURCES
The list of Texinfo source files.
@end defvar


@defvar doc_texinfo_TARGETS
@defvarx doc_texinfo_info_TARGETS
@defvarx doc_texinfo_html_TARGETS
The list of Texinfo target files.  These are the files that will be
built by the @code{doc-texinfo} rule.
@end defvar


@defvar doc_texinfo_CLEANFILES
The list of Texinfo files that will be remove by the
@code{doc-texinfo-clean} rule.
@end defvar


@defvar doc_texinfo_info_INSTLST
@defvarx doc_texinfo_html_INSTLST
The lists of files that will be installed on the system by the
@code{doc-texinfo-install} rule.
@end defvar


@defvar doc_texinfo_info_INSTDIR
@defvarx doc_texinfo_html_INSTDIR
The target directories for installation of Info and @acronym{HTML}
files.
@end defvar


@c page
@node rules test
@section Testing libraries


@noindent
Test files are supposet to be top--level programs under the @file{tests}
subdirectory of each project.

There should be one test file for each library, and its name must be
@code{test-<library>.sps} where @code{<library>} is the library file
name.  So the library with pathname @file{library/uriel/begin0.sls} must
have a test file with pathname @file{tests/test-begin0.sps}.


@deffn {Makefile Rule} test
@deffnx {Makefile Rule} tests
@deffnx {Makefile Rule} check
Run all the test files using @command{scheme-script} as Ikarus interface
and setting the Ikarus library path to:

@example
IKARUS_LIBRARY_PATH=$(srcdir)/libraries:$(srcdir)/tests
@end example

@noindent
notice that this will pick up libraries source files but not the
associated @fasl{} files.

Setting the variable @code{file} selects a single test file.  For
example:

@example
$ make test file=posix
@end example

@noindent
selects the test file @file{tests/test-posix.sps}.  When the tests are
written using the @code{(uriel test)} Scheme library: the @code{name}
variable selects a test name.  @ref{test,Writing test suites,Writing
test suites,nausicaa-uriel}
@end deffn


@c page
@node rules inspect
@section Inspecting variables


The value of @file{Makefile} variables can be inspected from the command
line with the following rules.


@deffn {Makefile Rule} echo-variable
Echo a variable to stdout.  Example:

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=slack_PACKAGE_NAME
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} echo-list-variable
Echo a variable to stdout, interpreting it as list of strings.  Each
string is echoed on its own line.  Example:

@example
$ make echo-list-variable VARIABLE=sls_INSTLST
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node package
@chapter Building packages


@value{PACKAGE} has limited support for building binary packages.  All
the Nausicaa projects that declare, in their @file{README} file, to
support the Nausicaa infrastructure, support building packages as
described in this chapter.

The idea is to install the files in a temporary location, and then to
use the native packaging tools to build a binary package.  The binary
package file is moved to (or directly created into) a subdirectory of
the project build directory.

@quotation
@strong{It is of paramount importance that we set the @env{TMPDIR}
environment variable to a good value, before attempting to use the rules
described in this chapter.  If @var{TMPDIR} is set to an empty string,
the @file{Makefile} will set it to @file{/tmp}.}
@end quotation


@menu
* bindist::                     Building plain binary packages.
* slackware::                   Building Slackware packages.
* redhat::                      Building RedHat packages.
@end menu


@c page
@node bindist
@section Building plain binary packages


Let's take the @code{nausicaa-scmobj} project as example; let's imagine
that inspecting the package variables yields this:

@example
$ cd scmobj
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=PACKAGE_NAME
nausicaa-scmobj

$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=PACKAGE_VERSION
0.1d0

$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=package_BUILD_VERSION
1mm

$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=package_ARCH
i686

$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=TMPDIR
/tmp/marco
@end example


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Makefile variables


@defvar bindist_PACKAGE_NAME
This is the file name of the binary distribution tarball.  Notice that
there is no directory part.

Example:

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=bindist_PACKAGE_NAME
nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0-i686-1mm.tar.bz2
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar bindist_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR
This is the root directory for temporary installation of files.

Example:

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=bindist_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR
/tmp/marco/nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar bindist_BUILDDIR
This is where the produced tarball will be finally stored.

Example (from the build directory of the author):

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=bindist_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR
/home/marco/src/devel/ikarus/nausicaa/scmobj/=build/./bindist.d
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar bindist_TARBALL_PATHNAME
This is the full pathname of the tarball.

Example:

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=bindist_TARBALL_PATHNAME
/home/marco/src/devel/ikarus/nausicaa/scmobj/=build/./bindist.d/nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0-i686-1mm.tar.bz2
@end example
@end defvar


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Makefile rules


@deffn {Makefile Rule} bindist
Build the binary distribution tarball and place it in the build
directory.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make bindist
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} bindist-builddir
If the @code{$(bindist_BUILDDIR)} directory does not exist: create it.
To be invoked as:

@example
$ make bindist-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} bindist-top-builddir
If the @code{$(bindist_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR)} directory does not exist:
create it.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make bindist-top-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} bindist-clean
Equivalent to invoke both the @code{bindist-clean-top-builddir} and
@code{bindist-clean-builddir} rules.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make bindist-clean
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} bindist-clean-top-builddir
Remove the @code{$(bindist_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR)} directory and all its
contents.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make bindist-clean-top-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} bindist-clean-builddir
Remove the @code{$(bindist_BUILDDIR)} directory and all its contents.
To be invoked as:

@example
$ make bindist-clean-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Example layout


@example
./usr/
./usr/local/
./usr/local/lib/
./usr/local/lib/ikarus/
./usr/local/lib/ikarus/scmobj/
./usr/local/lib/ikarus/scmobj/main.sls.ikarus-fasl
./usr/local/lib/ikarus/scmobj/main.sls
./usr/local/share/
./usr/local/share/doc/
./usr/local/share/doc/nausicaa-scmobj/
./usr/local/share/doc/nausicaa-scmobj/0.1d0/
./usr/local/share/doc/nausicaa-scmobj/0.1d0/info/
./usr/local/share/doc/nausicaa-scmobj/0.1d0/info/nausicaa-scmobj.info
@end example


@c page
@node slackware
@section Building Slackware packages


Support for Slackware packages allows the construction of both standard
and ``local'' packages.  Let's take the @code{nausicaa-scmobj} project
as example; let's imagine that inspecting the package variables yields
this:

@example
$ cd scmobj
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=PACKAGE_NAME
nausicaa-scmobj

$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=PACKAGE_VERSION
0.1d0

$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=package_BUILD_VERSION
1mm

$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=package_ARCH
i686

$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=TMPDIR
/tmp/marco
@end example


@menu
* slackware common::            Common variables and rules.
* slackware standard::          Building standard Slackware packages.
* slackware local::             Building local Slackware packages.
@end menu


@c page
@node slackware common
@subsection Common variables and rules


This section documents variables and rules that can are used both when
building standard packages and local packages.


@subsubheading Makefile variables


@defvar slack_PACKAGE_NAME
This is the file name of the Slackware package.  Notice that there is no
directory part.

Example:

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=slack_PACKAGE_NAME
nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0-i686-1mm.tgz
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar slack_PACKAGE_PREFIX
This is the package prefix, it is used to remove the package.

Example:

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=slack_PACKAGE_PREFIX
nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0-i686-1mm
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar slack_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR
This is the root directory for temporary installation of files.

Example:

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=slack_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR
/tmp/marco/nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar slack_PACKAGE_BUILDDIR
This is the root directory for building packages.  The rules for
standard packages will set it to:

@example
$(slack_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR)
@end example

@noindent
the rules for local packages will set it to:

@example
$(slack_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR)/$(prefix)
@end example

It is set to the empty string, and it will be set by the rules by
invoking @code{$(MAKE)} recursively.
@end defvar


@defvar slack_BUILDDIR
This is where the produced package will be finally stored.

Example (from the build directory of the author):

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=slack_BUILDDIR
/home/marco/src/devel/ikarus/nausicaa/scmobj/=build/./slackware.d
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar slack_REGISTRY
@defvarx slack_REGISTRY_DIR
These are used to select the pathname of the Slackware packages
registry.  The standard package rules will set @var{slack_REGISTRY} to:

@example
$(slack_REGISTRY_DIR)
@end example

@noindent
while the local package rules will set it to:

@example
$(prefix)$(slack_REGISTRY_DIR)
@end example

Example:

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=slack_REGISTRY_DIR
/var/log/packages
@end example
@end defvar


@defvar slack_INSTALLED_PACKAGE
The definition of this variable tries to read from the system the name
of an already installed package.  It is used to upgrade.

This variable Example (after having installed the package):

@example
$ make echo-variable VARIABLE=slack_INSTALLED_PACKAGE
nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0-i686-1mm
@end example
@end defvar


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Makefile rules


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware-builddir
If the directory @code{$(slack_BUILDDIR)} does not exist: create it.  To
be invoked as:

@example
$ make slackware-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware-top-builddir
If the directory @code{$(slack_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR)} does not exist:
create it.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make slackware-top-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware-aux
This is for auxiliary stuff: it is freely available to the user.  It
will be invoked after having installed the files in the temporary
location, and just before running @command{makepkg} (see the
@code{slackware} and @code{local-slackware} rules).

It is not meant to be invoked explicitly.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware-clean
Equivalent to invoke both the @code{slackware-clean-top-builddir} and
@code{slackware-clean-builddir} rules.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make slackware-clean
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware-clean-top-builddir
Remove the @code{$(slack_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR)} directory and all its
contents.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make slackware-clean-top-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware-clean-builddir
Remove the @code{$(slack_BUILDDIR)} directory and all its contents.  To
be invoked as:

@example
$ make slackware-clean-builddir
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node slackware standard
@subsection Building standard Slackware packages


A standard Slackware package is a normal Slackware package: a tarball
with @code{.tgz} extension; with the pathnames relative to the root
directory; registered in the @file{/var/log/packages} registry.


@subsubheading Makefile variables


@defvar slackware_STANDARD_ENV
The system environment with which the Slackware package management
scripts will be run.

Example:

@example
$ make echo-list-variable VARIABLE=slackware_STANDARD_ENV
PATH=/sbin:...
slack_PACKAGE_BUILDDIR=/tmp/marco/nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0
slack_REGISTRY=/var/log/packages
@end example

@noindent
we see that @file{/sbin} has been added to the @env{PATH} variable: this
is because the Slackware management scripts need to find each other.
@end defvar


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Makefile rules


For all the following rules: root privileges are needed to build a
standard package; so we may want to use a tool like @command{sudo} to
run @command{make}.  In the following we will assume that this is the
case.

Always remember that the @option{-n} option of @gnu{} Make allows us to
see the commands that a rule will execute, without actually executing
them.  Example:

@example
$ make local-slackware-upgrade -n
@end example


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware
Build the package and place it into the build directory.  To be invoked
as:

@example
$ sudo make slackware
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware-install
Install the previously built package.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make slackware-install
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware-remove
Try to upgrade an already installed package with the previously built
package.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make slackware-remove
@end example

See the @code{slack_INSTALLED_PACKAGE} variable for the name of the
package that will be removed.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} slackware-upgrade
Try to upgrade an already installed package with the previously built
package.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make slackware-upgrade
@end example

See the @code{slack_INSTALLED_PACKAGE} variable for the name of the
package that will be removed.
@end deffn


@c page
@node slackware local
@subsection Building local Slackware packages


A local Slackware package is: a tarball with @code{.tgz} extension; with
the pathnames relative to the selected installation prefix (for example
@file{/usr/local}); registered in the @file{$(prefix)/var/log/packages}
registry, where @code{$(prefix)} is the selected installation prefix.


@subsubheading Makefile variables


@defvar slackware_LOCAL_ENV
The system environment with which the Slackware package management
scripts will be run.

Example:

@example
$ make echo-list-variable VARIABLE=slackware_LOCAL_ENV
PATH=/sbin:...
slack_PACKAGE_BUILDDIR=/tmp/marco/nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0//usr/local
slack_REGISTRY=/usr/local/var/log/packages
slack_ENV=ROOT=/usr/local
@end example

@noindent
we see that @file{/sbin} has been added to the @env{PATH} variable: this
is because the Slackware management scripts need to find each other.
@end defvar


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Makefile rules


For all the following rules: root privileges may be needed to build a
local package; so we may want to use a tool like @command{sudo} to run
@command{make}.  In the following we will assume that this is the case.

Always remember that the @option{-n} option of @gnu{} Make allows us to
see the commands that a rule will execute, without actually executing
them.  Example:

@example
$ make local-slackware-upgrade -n
@end example


@deffn {Makefile Rule} local-slackware
Build the package and place it into the build directory.  To be invoked
as:

@example
$ sudo make local-slackware
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} local-slackware-install
Install the previously built package.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make local-slackware-install
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} local-slackware-remove
Try to upgrade an already installed package with the previously built
package.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make local-slackware-remove
@end example

See the @code{slack_INSTALLED_PACKAGE} variable for the name of the
package that will be removed.
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} local-slackware-upgrade
Try to upgrade an already installed package with the previously built
package.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ sudo make local-slackware-upgrade
@end example

See the @code{slack_INSTALLED_PACKAGE} variable for the name of the
package that will be removed.
@end deffn


@c page
@node redhat
@section Building RedHat packages


Remember that to obtain a list of the files in a package file (that is:
an uninstalled package) we have to do:

@example
$ rpm --query --list --package nausicaa-scmobj-0.1d0-1nau.rpm
@end example


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Makefile rules


@deffn {Makefile Rule} redhat
Build a package.  To be invoked as:

@example
$ make redhat
@end example

@quotation
@emph{Note:} It seems that @command{rpmbuild} insists in putting the
created package file under the @file{/usr/src/rpm/RPMS} directory; there
is no way to persuade it to do otherwise.  So we may need superuser
privileges to invoke the @code{redhat} rule.  Furthermore, if we have
mounted the @file{/usr} file system with ready--only permissions (shame
on us!!!) we will have to remount it read--write before invoking the
rule.
@end quotation
@end deffn


@deffn {Makefile Rule} redhat-clean
Remove the @code{$(redhat_PACKAGE_TOP_BUILDDIR)} and all its contents.
To be invoked as:

@example
$ make redhat-clean
@end example
@end deffn


@c page
@node Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@cindex FDL, GNU Free Documentation License
@center Version 1.1, March 2000

@display
Copyright @copyright{} 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307, USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display

@enumerate 0
@item
PREAMBLE

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
written document @dfn{free} in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.  Secondarily,
this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of ``copyleft'', which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.  It
complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does.  But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

@item
APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a
notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed
under the terms of this License.  The ``Document'', below, refers to any
such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a licensee, and is
addressed as ``you''.

A ``Modified Version'' of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A ``Secondary Section'' is a named appendix or a front-matter section of
the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject
(or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly
within that overall subject.  (For example, if the Document is in part a
textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

The ``Invariant Sections'' are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License.

The ``Cover Texts'' are certain short passages of text that are listed,
as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License.

A ``Transparent'' copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, whose contents can be viewed and edited directly and
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup has been designed to thwart or discourage
subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.  A copy that is
not ``Transparent'' is called ``Opaque''.

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
@sc{ascii} without markup, Texinfo input format, La@TeX{} input format,
@acronym{SGML} or @acronym{XML} using a publicly available
@acronym{DTD}, and standard-conforming simple @acronym{HTML} designed
for human modification.  Opaque formats include PostScript,
@acronym{PDF}, proprietary formats that can be read and edited only by
proprietary word processors, @acronym{SGML} or @acronym{XML} for which
the @acronym{DTD} and/or processing tools are not generally available,
and the machine-generated @acronym{HTML} produced by some word
processors for output purposes only.

The ``Title Page'' means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, ``Title Page'' means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

@item
VERBATIM COPYING

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.

@item
COPYING IN QUANTITY

If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100,
and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose
the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a publicly-accessible computer-network location containing a complete
Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material, which the
general network-using public has access to download anonymously at no
charge using public-standard network protocols.  If you use the latter
option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin
distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location
until at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque
copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to
the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give
them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.

@item
MODIFICATIONS

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

@enumerate A
@item
Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
(which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section
of the Document).  You may use the same title as a previous version
if the original publisher of that version gives permission.

@item
List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the
Document (all of its principal authors, if it has less than five).

@item
State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
Modified Version, as the publisher.

@item
Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

@item
Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
adjacent to the other copyright notices.

@item
Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the
terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.

@item
Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.

@item
Include an unaltered copy of this License.

@item
Preserve the section entitled ``History'', and its title, and add to
it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page.  If
there is no section entitled ``History'' in the Document, create one
stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
Version as stated in the previous sentence.

@item
Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise
the network locations given in the Document for previous versions
it was based on.  These may be placed in the ``History'' section.
You may omit a network location for a work that was published at
least four years before the Document itself, or if the original
publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.

@item
In any section entitled ``Acknowledgments'' or ``Dedications'',
preserve the section's title, and preserve in the section all the
substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgments
and/or dedications given therein.

@item
Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.

@item
Delete any section entitled ``Endorsements''.  Such a section
may not be included in the Modified Version.

@item
Do not retitle any existing section as ``Endorsements''
or to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.
@end enumerate

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section entitled ``Endorsements'', provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties---for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

@item
COMBINING DOCUMENTS

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled ``History''
in the various original documents, forming one section entitled
``History''; likewise combine any sections entitled ``Acknowledgments'',
and any sections entitled ``Dedications''.  You must delete all sections
entitled ``Endorsements.''

@item
COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.

@item
AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version
of the Document, provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the
compilation.  Such a compilation is called an ``aggregate'', and this
License does not apply to the other self-contained works thus compiled
with the Document, on account of their being thus compiled, if they
are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one quarter
of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that surround only the Document within the aggregate.
Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.

@item
TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
translation of this License provided that you also include the
original English version of this License.  In case of a disagreement
between the translation and the original English version of this
License, the original English version will prevail.

@item
TERMINATION

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other attempt to
copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However,
parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

@item
FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/}.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License ``or any later version'' applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.
@end enumerate

@page
@appendixsubsec ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:

@smallexample
@group
  Copyright (C)  @var{year}  @var{your name}.
  Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
  under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
  or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
  with the Invariant Sections being @var{list their titles}, with the
  Front-Cover Texts being @var{list}, and with the Back-Cover Texts being @var{list}.
  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
  Free Documentation License''.
@end group
@end smallexample

If you have no Invariant Sections, write ``with no Invariant Sections''
instead of saying which ones are invariant.  If you have no
Front-Cover Texts, write ``no Front-Cover Texts'' instead of
``Front-Cover Texts being @var{list}''; likewise for Back-Cover Texts.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.

@c page
@node references
@appendix Bibliography and references



@c page
@node concept index
@appendix An entry for each concept

@printindex cp

@node function index
@appendix An entry for each function.

@printindex fn

@node variable index
@appendix An entry for each variable.

@printindex vr

@node type index
@appendix An entry for each type.

@printindex tp

@contents
@bye

@c end of file
