\input texinfo.tex
@c %**start of header
@setfilename expat.info
@settitle Expat
@c %**end of header

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro version{}
2.0.1
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Expat macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro dtd{}
@acronym{DTD}
@end macro

@macro uri{}
@acronym{URI}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c License macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gnu{}
@acronym{GNU}
@end macro

@macro gpl{}
@acronym{GPL}
@end macro

@macro fdl{}
@acronym{FDL}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Special notes.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro forunix{}
@strong{Unix:}
@end macro

@macro fixme{TEXT}
@strong{FIXME: \TEXT\}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme related macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rnrs{VERSION}
@acronym{R\VERSION\RS}
@end macro

@macro rsix{}
Revised^6 Report on the algorithmic language Scheme
@end macro

@macro repl{}
@acronym{REPL}
@end macro

@macro srfi{}
@acronym{SRFI}
@end macro

@c Separating the @srfi{} macro from the number with a '--' rather than
@c a '-'  makes the expansion look  ugly in menu entries  under the Info
@c reader.  IMHO  this should not happen,  but it does; so  we live with
@c this, because the main purpose of this document is to provide an Info
@c version.
@macro ansrfi{NUM}
@srfi{}-\NUM\
@end macro

@macro clos{}
@acronym{CLOS}
@end macro

@macro library{SPEC}
@code{(\SPEC\)}
@end macro

@macro ffi{}
@acronym{FFI}
@end macro

@macro class{NAME}
@code{<\NAME\>}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Miscellaneous acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro ansi{}
@acronym{ANSI}
@end macro

@macro api{}
@acronym{API}
@end macro

@c Remember that @url is already used by Texinfo.
@macro aurl{}
@acronym{URL}
@end macro

@macro ascii{}
@acronym{ASCII}
@end macro

@macro cpu{}
@acronym{CPU}
@end macro

@macro csv{}
@acronym{CSV}
@end macro

@macro ieee{}
@acronym{IEEE}
@end macro

@macro iso{}
@acronym{ISO}
@end macro

@macro posix{}
@acronym{POSIX}
@end macro

@macro rfc{}
@acronym{RFC}
@end macro

@macro utf{}
@acronym{UTF}
@end macro

@macro utc{}
@acronym{UTC}
@end macro

@macro tai{}
@acronym{TAI}
@end macro

@macro pxml{}
@acronym{XML}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Software acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gmp{}
@acronym{GMP}
@end macro

@macro gcc{}
@acronym{GCC}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Network related acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro http{}
@acronym{HTTP}
@end macro

@macro ftp{}
@acronym{FTP}
@end macro

@macro ip{}
@acronym{IP}
@end macro

@macro tcp{}
@acronym{TCP}
@end macro

@macro udp{}
@acronym{UDP}
@end macro

@macro smtp{}
@acronym{SMTP}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro func{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro snull{}
@code{()}
@end macro

@macro true{}
@code{#t}
@end macro

@macro false{}
@code{#f}
@end macro

@macro keyword{NAME}
@code{#:\NAME\}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c C language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro cfunc{NAME}
@code{\NAME\()}
@end macro

@macro cnull{}
@code{NULL}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros for references to external documents.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro glibcref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,libc}
@end macro

@c @macro rsixref{NODE, TITLE}
@c @ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,r6rs}
@c @end macro

@macro bibref{TAG}
@code{[\TAG\]}
@end macro

@macro autoconfref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,autoconf}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c RNRS document macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rsixlibrary{THING}
@code{(rnrs \THING\ (6))}
@end macro

@macro arbno{THING}
\THING\*
@end macro

@macro atleastone{THING}
\THING\+
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used in normal text.

@macro meta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro metai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro metaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro metaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used inside @example environment and @samp directives.

@macro cmeta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro cmetai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro cmetaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro cmetaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used inside argument lists.

@macro ameta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro ametai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro ametaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro ametaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro hyper{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro hyperi{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro hyperii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro hyperiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@macro hypern{THING}
<\THING\n>
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro varo{THING}
@var{\THING\0}
@end macro

@macro vari{THING}
@var{\THING\1}
@end macro

@macro varii{THING}
@var{\THING\2}
@end macro

@macro variii{THING}
@var{\THING\3}
@end macro

@macro variv{THING}
@var{\THING\4}
@end macro

@macro varn{THING}
@var{\THING\n}
@end macro

@macro vark{THING}
@var{\THING\k}
@end macro

@macro varj{THING}
@var{\THING\j}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Values.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@set TITLE                      Expat

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the full
@c name of this package.
@set PACKAGE                    Expat

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the
@c nickname of the project: the name that is used to compose the
@c distribution tarball or the web address.
@set PACKAGE_NICKNAME           expat


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Copyright notice.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
This document describes version @version{} of @value{PACKAGE}, a C
language library for parsing @pxml{} documents.  It is the underlying
@pxml{} parser for the open source Mozilla project, Perl's
@samp{XML::Parser}, Python's @samp{xml.parsers.expat}, and other
open--source @pxml{} parsers.

@quotation
The bulk of this document was originally commissioned as an article by
@samp{XML.com}.  They graciously allowed Clark Cooper to retain
copyright and to distribute it with Expat.  This version has been
substantially extended to include documentation on features which have
been added since the original article was published, and additional
information on using the original interface.

This is a Texinfo reformatting of the original documentation from Expat
version @version{}.  The maintainer of this specific version is Marco
Maggi @email{mrc.mgg@@gmail.com}.
@end quotation

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} 1998, 1999, 2000 Thai Open Source Software Center
Ltd and Clark Cooper.

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 Expat
maintainers.

See the appendix ``Package License'' for the licence notice.
@end copying


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Headers.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Revision @version{}
@c @author @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ifinfo
@dircategory Development
@direntry
* expat: (expat).               Expat.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ignore
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@end ignore

@c page
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Expat

@insertcopying

@menu
* overview::                    Overview of the package.
* using::                       Using Expat.
* api::                         Expat reference.

Appendices

* document license::            Document license.
* references::                  Bibliography and references.

Indexes

* concept index::               An entry for each concept.
* function index::              An entry for each function.
* variable index::              An entry for each variable.
* type index::                  An entry for each type.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Overview

* overview intro::              The Expat @pxml{} parser.
* overview install::            Building and installing Expat.

Using Expat

* using compile::               Compiling and linking against expat.
* using basics::                Basics.
* using comm::                  Communicating between handlers.
* using version::               @pxml{} version.
* using namespace::             Namespace processing.
* using encodings::             Character encodings.
* using entity::                Handling external entity references.
* using dtd::                   Parsing @dtd{}s.
* using stop::                  Temporarily stopping parsing.

Expat reference

* api create::                  Parser creation.
* api parse::                   Parsing.
* api handlers::                Setting the handlers.
* api report::                  Parse position and error
                                reporting functions.
* api version::                 Inspecting Expat version.
* api features::                Inspecting Expat features.
* api memory::                  Parser associated memory.
* api misc::                    Miscellaneous functions.

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@end ifnottex


@c page
@node overview
@chapter Overview


This document describes version @version{} of @value{PACKAGE}, a C
language library for parsing @pxml{} documents.  It is the underlying
@pxml{} parser for the open source Mozilla project, Perl's
@samp{XML::Parser}, Python's @samp{xml.parsers.expat}, and other
open--source @pxml{} parsers.

This library is the creation of James Clark, who's also given us
@code{groff} (an @code{nroff} look--alike), Jade (an implemention of
@acronym{ISO}'s @acronym{DSSSL} stylesheet language for @acronym{SGML}),
@acronym{XP} (a Java @pxml{} parser package), @acronym{XT} (a Java
@acronym{XSL} engine).  James was also the technical lead on the @pxml{}
Working Group at @acronym{W3C} that produced the @pxml{} specification.

This is free software, licensed under the MIT/X Consortium license; we
can download it from the Expat home page.

@center @url{http://expat.sourceforge.net/}

@menu
* overview intro::              The Expat @pxml{} parser.
* overview install::            Building and installing Expat.
@end menu

@c page
@node overview intro
@section The Expat @pxml{} parser


Expat is a stream--oriented parser: We register callback or handler
functions and then start feeding the parser with the document; as the
parser recognizes parts of the document, it calls the appropriate
handler.  The document is processed in pieces, so we can start parsing
before loading the whole document; this also allows us to parse really
huge documents that will not fit in memory.

Expat can be intimidating due to the many kinds of handlers and options
we can set.  But we only need to learn four functions in order to do
90% of what we'll want to do with it:

@table @cfunc
@item XML_ParserCreate
Create a new parser object.

@item XML_SetElementHandler
Set handlers for start and end tags.

@item XML_SetCharacterDataHandler
Set handler for text.

@item XML_Parse
Feed a buffer holding the document to the parser.
@end table

Let's look at a very simple example program that only uses three of the
above functions since it does not need a character handler.  The program
prints an element outline, indenting child elements to distinguish them
from the parent elements.

@smallexample
/***********************************************************
 * outline.c
 *
 * Copyright 1999, Clark Cooper
 * All rights reserved.
 *
 * This program is free software; you can redistribute it
 * and/or modify it under the terms of the license contained
 * in the COPYING file that comes with the expat distribution.
 *
 * THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
 * KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE
 * WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
 * PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS
 * OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
 * OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT
 * OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH
 * THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
 *
 * Read an XML document from standard input and print an
 * element outline on standard output.  Must be used with
 * Expat compiled for UTF-8 output.
 */


#include <stdio.h>
#include <expat.h>

#if defined(__amigaos__) && defined(__USE_INLINE__)
#  include <proto/expat.h>
#endif

#ifdef XML_LARGE_SIZE
#  if defined(XML_USE_MSC_EXTENSIONS) && _MSC_VER < 1400
#    define XML_FMT_INT_MOD "I64"
#  else
#    define XML_FMT_INT_MOD "ll"
#  endif
#else
#  define XML_FMT_INT_MOD "l"
#endif

#define BUFFSIZE        8192

char Buff[BUFFSIZE];

int Depth;

static void XMLCALL
start (void *data, const char *element, const char **attribute)
@{
  for (int i = 0; i < Depth; i++)
    printf("  ");

  printf("%s", element);

  for (int i = 0; attribute[i]; i += 2)
    printf(" %s='%s'", attribute[i], attribute[i + 1]);

  printf("\n");
  Depth++;
@}

static void XMLCALL
end (void *data, const char *el)
@{
  Depth--;
@}

int
main (int argc, char *argv[])
@{
  XML_Parser p = XML_ParserCreate(NULL);
  if (! p)
    @{
      fprintf(stderr, "Couldn't allocate memory for parser\n");
      exit(-1);
    @}

  XML_SetElementHandler(p, start, end);

  for (;;)
    @{
      int done;
      int len;

      len = (int)fread(Buff, 1, BUFFSIZE, stdin);
      if (ferror(stdin))
        @{
          fprintf(stderr, "Read error\n");
          exit(-1);
        @}
    done = feof(stdin);

    if (XML_Parse(p, Buff, len, done) == XML_STATUS_ERROR)
      @{
        fprintf(stderr,
                "Parse error at line %" XML_FMT_INT_MOD "u:\n%s\n",
                XML_GetCurrentLineNumber(p),
                XML_ErrorString(XML_GetErrorCode(p)));
        exit(-1);
      @}

      if (done)
        break;
    @}
  XML_ParserFree(p);
  return 0;
@}
@end smallexample

After creating the parser, the program just has the job of shoveling the
document to the parser so that it can do its work.

@itemize
@item
The @cfunc{start} handler does all the work: It prints two indenting
spaces for every level of ancestor elements, then it prints the element
and attribute information; finally it increments the global @samp{Depth}
variable.

@item
The @cfunc{end} handler simply does the bookkeeping work of decrementing
@samp{Depth}.
@end itemize

Note the @samp{XMLCALL} annotation used for the callbacks.  This is used
to ensure that the Expat and the callbacks are using the same calling
convention in case the compiler options used for Expat itself and the
client code are different.  Expat tries not to care what the default
calling convention is, though it may require that it be compiled with a
default convention of @samp{cdecl} on some platforms.  For code which
uses Expat, however, the calling convention is specified by the
@samp{XMLCALL} annotation on most platforms; callbacks should be defined
using this annotation.

The @samp{XMLCALL} annotation was added in Expat 1.95.7, but existing
working Expat applications don't need to add it (since they are already
using the @samp{cdecl} calling convention, or they would not be
working).  The annotation is only needed if the default calling
convention may be something other than @samp{cdecl}.  To use the
annotation safely with older versions of Expat, we can conditionally
define it after including Expat's header file:

@example
#include <expat.h>

#ifndef XMLCALL
#  if defined(_MSC_EXTENSIONS) && !defined(__BEOS__) &&
      !defined(__CYGWIN__)
#    define XMLCALL __cdecl
#  elif defined(__GNUC__)
#    define XMLCALL __attribute__((cdecl))
#  else
#    define XMLCALL
#  endif
#endif
@end example

@c page
@node overview install
@section Building and installing Expat


The Expat distribution comes as a compressed tar file; we may download
the latest version from Source Forge.  After unpacking it, change the
current directory to the top of the source tree, then follow either the
Win32 directions or Unix directions below.

@subsubheading Building under Win32

If we're using the @gnu{} compiler under Cygwin, follow the Unix
directions in the next section.  Otherwise if we have Microsoft's
Developer Studio installed, then from Windows Explorer double--click on
@file{expat.dsp} in the @file{lib} directory and build and install in
the usual manner.

Alternatively, we may download the Win32 binary package that contains
the @file{expat.h} include file and a pre--built @acronym{DLL}.

@subsubheading Building under Unix (or @gnu{})

First we'll need to run the @command{configure} shell script in order to
configure the Makefiles and headers for our system.

If we're happy with all the defaults that configure picks for us, and
we have permission on our system to install into @file{/usr/local},
we can install Expat with this sequence of commands:

@example
$ ./configure
$ make
$ make install
@end example

There are some options that we can provide to this script, but the only
one we'll mention here is the @option{--prefix} option.  We can find
out all the options available by running configure with just the
@option{--help} option.

By default, the @command{configure} script sets things up so that the
library gets installed in @file{/usr/local/lib} and the associated
header file in @file{/usr/local/include}.  But if we were to give the
option @code{--prefix=/home/me/mystuff}, then the library and header
would get installed in @file{/home/me/mystuff/lib} and
@file{/home/me/mystuff/include} respectively.

@subsubheading Configuring Expat Using the Pre--Processor

Expat's feature set can be configured using a small number of
pre-processor definitions. The definition of this symbols does not
affect the set of entry points for Expat, only the behavior of the
@api{} and the definition of character types in the case of
@code{XML_UNICODE_WCHAR_T}.  The symbols are:

@table @code
@item XML_DTD
Include support for using and reporting @dtd{}--based content.  If this
is defined, default attribute values from an external @dtd{} subset are
reported and attribute value normalization occurs based on the type of
attributes defined in the external subset.  Without this, Expat has a
smaller memory footprint and can be faster, but will not load external
entities or process conditional sections.  This does not affect the set
of functions available in the @api{}.

@item XML_NS
When defined, support for the Namespaces in @pxml{} specification is
included.

@item XML_UNICODE
When defined, character data reported to the application is encoded in
@utf{}-16 using wide characters of the type @code{XML_Char}.  This is
implied if @code{XML_UNICODE_WCHAR_T} is defined.

@item XML_UNICODE_WCHAR_T
If defined, causes the @code{XML_Char} character type to be defined
using the @code{wchar_t} type; otherwise, @code{unsigned short} is used.
Defining this implies @code{XML_UNICODE}.

@item XML_LARGE_SIZE
If defined, causes the @code{XML_Size} and @code{XML_Index} integer
types to be at least 64 bits in size.  This is intended to support
processing of very large input streams, where the return values of
@cfunc{XML_GetCurrentByteIndex}, @cfunc{XML_GetCurrentLineNumber} and
@cfunc{XML_GetCurrentColumnNumber} could overflow.  It may not be
supported by all compilers, and is turned off by default.

@item XML_CONTEXT_BYTES
The number of input bytes of markup context which the parser will ensure
are available for reporting via @cfunc{XML_GetInputContext}.  This is
normally set to 1024, and must be set to a positive interger.  If this
is not defined, the input context will not be available and
@cfunc{XML_GetInputContext} will always report @cnull{}.  Without this,
Expat has a smaller memory footprint and can be faster.

@item XML_STATIC
On Windows, this should be set if Expat is going to be linked statically
with the code that calls it; this is required to get all the right
@acronym{MSVC} magic annotations correct.  This is ignored on other
platforms.
@end table


@c page
@node using
@chapter Using Expat


@menu
* using compile::               Compiling and linking against expat.
* using basics::                Basics.
* using comm::                  Communicating between handlers.
* using version::               @pxml{} version.
* using namespace::             Namespace processing.
* using encodings::             Character encodings.
* using entity::                Handling external entity references.
* using dtd::                   Parsing @dtd{}s.
* using stop::                  Temporarily stopping parsing.
@end menu


@c page
@node using compile
@section Compiling and linking against expat


Unless Expat is installed in a location not expected by the compiler and
linker, all we have to do to use Expat programs is to include the Expat
header:

@example
#include <expat.h>
@end example

@noindent
in the source files that make calls to it and to tell the linker that it
needs to link against the Expat library.  On Unix systems, this would
usually be done with the @option{-lexpat} argument.  Otherwise, we'll
need to tell the compiler where to look for the Expat header, and to the
linker where to find the Expat library.  We may also need to take steps
to tell the operating system where to find this library at run time.

On a Unix--based system, here's what a @file{Makefile} might look like
when Expat is installed in a standard location:

@example
CC=cc
LDFLAGS=
LIBS= -lexpat
xmlapp: xmlapp.o
        $(CC) $(LDFLAGS) -o xmlapp xmlapp.o $(LIBS)
@end example

If we installed Expat in, say, @file{/home/me/mystuff}, then the
@file{Makefile} would look like this:

@example
CC=cc
CFLAGS= -I/home/me/mystuff/include
LDFLAGS=
LIBS= -L/home/me/mystuff/lib -lexpat
xmlapp: xmlapp.o
        $(CC) $(LDFLAGS) -o xmlapp xmlapp.o $(LIBS)
@end example

We'd also have to set the environment variable @env{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} to
@file{/home/me/mystuff/lib} (or to
@code{$@{LD_LIBRARY_PATH@}:/home/me/mystuff/lib} if
@env{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} already has some directories in it) in order to
run the program.

@c page
@node using basics
@section Basics


As we saw in the example in the overview, the first step in parsing an
@pxml{} document with Expat is to create a parser object.  There are
three functions in the Expat @api{} for creating a parser object.
However, only two of these (@cfunc{XML_ParserCreate} and
@cfunc{XML_ParserCreateNS}) can be used for constructing a parser for a
top--level document.  The object returned by these functions is an
opaque pointer to data with further internal structure (@file{expat.h}
declares it as @code{void *}).  In order to free the memory associated
with this object we must call @cfunc{XML_ParserFree}.

Note that if we have provided any user data that gets stored in the
parser, then our application is responsible for freeing it prior to
calling @cfunc{XML_ParserFree}.

The objects returned by the parser creation functions are good for
parsing only one @pxml{} document or external parsed entity.  If the
application needs to parse many @pxml{} documents, then it needs to
create a parser object for each one.  The best way to deal with this is
to create a higher level object containing all the default
initialization we want for the parser objects.

Walking through a document hierarchy with a stream oriented parser will
require a good stack mechanism in order to keep track of current
context.  For instance, to answer the simple question, ``What element
does this text belong to?'' requires a stack, since the parser may have
descended into other elements that are children of the current one and
has encountered this text on the way out.

The things we're likely to want to keep on a stack are the currently
opened element and it's attributes.  We push this information onto the
stack in the start handler and we pop it off in the end handler.

For some tasks, it is sufficient to just keep information on what the
depth of the stack is (or would be if we had one).  The outline program
shown in the overview presents one example.  Another such task would be
skipping over a complete element.  When we see the start tag for the
element we want to skip, we set a skip flag and record the depth at
which the element started.  When the end tag handler encounters the same
depth, the skipped element has ended and the flag may be cleared.  If we
follow the convention that the root element starts at 1, then we can use
the same variable for skip flag and skip depth.

@example
void
init_info (Parseinfo *info)
@{
  info->skip  = 0;
  info->depth = 1;
  /* Other initializations here */
@}

void XMLCALL
rawstart (void *data, const char *el, const char **attr)
@{
  Parseinfo *inf = (Parseinfo *) data;

  if (! inf->skip)
    @{
      if (should_skip(inf, el, attr))
        inf->skip = inf->depth;
      else
        start(inf, el, attr); /* This does rest of start handling */
    @}

  inf->depth++;
@}

void XMLCALL
rawend (void *data, const char *el)
@{
  Parseinfo *inf = (Parseinfo *) data;

  inf->depth--;

  if (! inf->skip)
    end(inf, el);              /* This does rest of end handling */

  if (inf->skip == inf->depth)
    inf->skip = 0;
@}
@end example

Notice in the above example the difference in how depth is manipulated
in the start and end handlers.  The end tag handler should be the mirror
image of the start tag handler.  This is necessary to properly model
containment.  Since, in the start tag handler, we incremented depth
after the main body of start tag code, then in the end handler, we need
to manipulate it @emph{before} the main body.  If we'd decided to
increment it first thing in the start handler, then we'd have had to
decrement it last thing in the end handler.

@c page
@node using comm
@section Communicating between handlers


In order to be able to pass information between different handlers
without using globals, we'll need to define a data structure to hold the
shared variables.  We can then tell Expat (with the
@cfunc{XML_SetUserData} function) to pass a pointer to this structure to
the handlers.  This is the first argument received by most handlers.

In the reference section, an argument to a callback function is named
@var{userData} and have type @samp{void *} if the user data is passed;
it will have the type @samp{XML_Parser} if the parser itself is passed.
When the parser is passed, the user data may be retrieved using
@cfunc{XML_GetUserData}.

One common case where multiple calls to a single handler may need to
communicate using an application data structure is the case when content
passed to the character data handler (set by
@cfunc{XML_SetCharacterDataHandler}) needs to be accumulated.

A common first--time mistake with any of the event--oriented interfaces
to an @pxml{} parser is to expect all the text contained in an element
to be reported by a single call to the character data handler.  Expat,
like many other @pxml{} parsers, reports such data as a sequence of
calls; there's no way to know when the end of the sequence is reached
until a different callback is made.  A buffer referenced by the user
data structure proves both an effective and convenient place to
accumulate character data.

@c page
@node using version
@section @pxml{} version


Expat is an @pxml{} 1.0 parser, and as such never complains based on the
value of the version pseudo--attribute in the @pxml{} declaration, if
present.

If an application needs to check the version number (to support
alternate processing), it should use the @cfunc{XML_SetXmlDeclHandler}
function to set a handler that uses the information in the @pxml{}
declaration to determine what to do.  This example shows how to check
that only a version number of @samp{1.0} is accepted:

@smallexample
static int wrong_version;
static XML_Parser parser;

static void XMLCALL
xmldecl_handler(void            *userData,
                const XML_Char  *version,
                const XML_Char  *encoding,
                int              standalone)
@{
  static const XML_Char Version_1_0[] = @{ '1', '.', '0', 0 @};

  int i;

  for (i=0; i<(sizeof(Version_1_0) / sizeof(Version_1_0[0])); ++i)
    @{
      if (version[i] != Version_1_0[i])
        @{
          wrong_version = 1;
          /* also clear all other handlers: */
          XML_SetCharacterDataHandler(parser, NULL);
          ...
          return;
        @}
    @}
  ...
@}
@end smallexample

@c page
@node using namespace
@section Namespace processing


When the parser is created using the @cfunc{XML_ParserCreateNS},
function, Expat performs namespace processing.  Under namespace
processing, Expat consumes @code{xmlns} and @code{xmlns:...} attributes,
which declare namespaces for the scope of the element in which they
occur.  This means that the start handler will not see these attributes.
The application can still be informed of these declarations by setting
namespace declaration handlers with @cfunc{XML_SetNamespaceDeclHandler}.

Element type and attribute names that belong to a given namespace are
passed to the appropriate handler in expanded form.  By default this
expanded form is a concatenation of the namespace @uri{}, the separator
character (which is the 2nd argument to @cfunc{XML_ParserCreateNS}), and
the local name (i.e. the part after the colon).  Names with undeclared
prefixes are not well--formed when namespace processing is enabled, and
will trigger an error.  Unprefixed attribute names are never expanded,
and unprefixed element names are only expanded when they are in the
scope of a default namespace.

However if @cfunc{XML_SetReturnNSTriplet} has been called with a
non--zero @var{do_nst} parameter, then the expanded form for names with
an explicit prefix is a concatenation of: @uri{}, separator, local name,
separator, prefix.

We can set handlers for the start of a namespace declaration and for the
end of a scope of a declaration with the
@cfunc{XML_SetNamespaceDeclHandler} function.  The
@var{StartNamespaceDeclHandler} is called prior to the start tag handler
and the @var{EndNamespaceDeclHandler} is called after the corresponding
end tag that ends the namespace's scope.

The namespace start handler gets passed the prefix and @uri{} for the
namespace.  For a default namespace declaration (@code{xmlns='...'}),
the prefix will be null.  The @uri{} will be null for the case where the
default namespace is being unset.  The namespace end handler just gets
the prefix for the closing scope.

These handlers are called for each declaration.  So if, for instance, a
start tag had three namespace declarations, then the
@var{StartNamespaceDeclHandler} would be called three times before the
start tag handler is called, once for each declaration.

@c page
@node using encodings
@section Character encodings


While @pxml{} is based on Unicode, and every @pxml{} processor is
required to recognized @utf{}-8 and @utf{}-16 (1 and 2 byte encodings of
Unicode), other encodings may be declared in @pxml{} documents or
entities.  For the main document, an @pxml{} declaration may contain an
encoding declaration:

@example
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="ISO-8859-2"?>
@end example

External parsed entities may begin with a text declaration, which looks
like an @pxml{} declaration with just an encoding declaration:

@example
<?xml encoding="Big5"?>
@end example

With Expat, we may also specify an encoding at the time of creating a
parser.  This is useful when the encoding information may come from a
source outside the document itself (like a higher level protocol).

There are four built--in encodings in Expat:

@example
UTF-8
UTF-16
ISO-8859-1
US-ASCII
@end example

Anything else discovered in an encoding declaration or in the protocol
encoding specified in the parser constructor, triggers a call to the
@var{UnknownEncodingHandler}.  This handler gets passed the encoding
name and a pointer to an @code{XML_Encoding} data structure.  Our
handler must fill in this structure and return @code{XML_STATUS_OK} if
it knows how to deal with the encoding.  Otherwise the handler should
return @code{XML_STATUS_ERROR}.  The handler also gets passed a pointer
to an optional application data structure that we may indicate when we
set the handler.

Expat places restrictions on character encodings that it can support by
filling in the @code{XML_Encoding} structure.

@enumerate
@item
Every @ascii{} character that can appear in a well--formed @pxml{}
document must be represented by a single byte, and that byte must
correspond to it's @ascii{} encoding (except for the characters
@code{$@@\^'@{@}~}).

@item
Characters must be encoded in 4 bytes or less.

@item
All characters encoded must have Unicode scalar values less than or
equal to 65535 (0xFFFF).  This does not apply to the built--in support
for @utf{}-16 and @utf{}-8.

@item
No character may be encoded by more that one distinct sequence of bytes.
@end enumerate

@code{XML_Encoding} contains an array of integers that correspond to the
first byte of an encoding sequence.  If the value in the array for a
byte is zero or positive, then the byte is a single byte encoding that
encodes the Unicode scalar value contained in the array.  A @code{-1} in
this array indicates a malformed byte.  If the value is @code{-2},
@code{-3}, or @code{-4}, then the byte is the beginning of a 2, 3, or 4
byte sequence respectively.  Multi--byte sequences are sent to the
convert function pointed at in the @code{XML_Encoding} structure.  This
function should return the Unicode scalar value for the sequence or
@code{-1} if the sequence is malformed.

One pitfall that novice Expat users are likely to fall into is that
although Expat may accept input in various encodings, the strings that
it passes to the handlers are always encoded in @utf{}-8 or @utf{}-16
(depending on how Expat was compiled).  Our application is responsible
for any translation of these strings into other encodings.

@c page
@node using entity
@section Handling external entity references


Expat does not read or parse external entities directly.  Note that any
external @dtd{} is a special case of an external entity.  If we've set
no @var{ExternalEntityRefHandler}, then external entity references are
silently ignored.  Otherwise, it calls our handler with the information
needed to read and parse the external entity.

Our handler isn't actually responsible for parsing the entity, but it is
responsible for creating a subsidiary parser with
@cfunc{XML_ExternalEntityParserCreate} that will do the job.  This
returns an instance of @code{XML_Parser} that has handlers and other
data structures initialized from the parent parser.  We may then use
@cfunc{XML_Parse} or @cfunc{XML_ParseBuffer} calls against this parser.
Since external entities my refer to other external entities, our handler
should be prepared to be called recursively.

@c page
@node using dtd
@section Parsing @dtd{}s


In order to parse parameter entities, before starting the parse, we
must call @cfunc{XML_SetParamEntityParsing} with one of the following
arguments:

@table @code
@item XML_PARAM_ENTITY_PARSING_NEVER
Don't parse parameter entities or the external subset.

@item XML_PARAM_ENTITY_PARSING_UNLESS_STANDALONE
Parse parameter entites and the external subset unless standalone was
set to ``yes'' in the @pxml{} declaration.

@item XML_PARAM_ENTITY_PARSING_ALWAYS
Always parse parameter entities and the external subset.
@end table

In order to read an external @dtd{}, we also have to set an external
entity reference handler as described above.

@c page
@node using stop
@section Temporarily stopping parsing


Expat 1.95.8 introduces a new feature: It is now possible to stop
parsing temporarily from within a handler function, even if more data
has already been passed into the parser.  Applications for this include:

@itemize
@item
Supporting the @code{XInclude} specification.

@item
Delaying further processing until additional information is available
from some other source.

@item
Adjusting processor load as task priorities shift within an application.

@item
Stopping parsing completely (simply free or reset the parser instead of
resuming in the outer parsing loop).  This can be useful if an
application--domain error is found in the @pxml{} being parsed or if the
result of the parse is determined not to be useful after all.
@end itemize

To take advantage of this feature, the main parsing loop of an
application needs to support this specifically.  It cannot be supported
with a parsing loop compatible with Expat 1.95.7 or earlier (though
existing loops will continue to work without supporting the stop/resume
feature).

An application that uses this feature for a single parser will have the
rough structure (in pseudo--code):

@example
fd = open_input()
p  = create_parser()

if parse_xml(p, fd)
  @{
    /* suspended */

    int suspended = 1;

    while (suspended)
      @{
        do_something_else()
        if ready_to_resume()
          @{
            suspended = continue_parsing(p, fd);
          @}
      @}
  @}
@end example

An application that may resume any of several parsers based on input
(either from the @pxml{} being parsed or some other source) will
certainly have more interesting control structures.

This C function could be used for the @cfunc{parse_xml} function
mentioned in the pseudo-code above:

@smallexample
#define BUFF_SIZE 10240

/* Parse a document from the open file descriptor 'fd' until
   the parse is complete (the document has been completely
   parsed, or there's been an error), or the parse is stopped.
   Return non-zero when the parse is merely suspended. */

int
parse_xml (XML_Parser p, int fd)
@{
  for (;;)
    @{
      int last_chunk;
      int bytes_read;
      enum XML_Status status;

      void *buff = XML_GetBuffer(p, BUFF_SIZE);
      if (buff == NULL)
        @{
         /* handle error... */
         return 0;
        @}
    bytes_read = read(fd, buff, BUFF_SIZE);
    if (bytes_read < 0)
      @{
        /* handle error... */
        return 0;
      @}
    status = XML_ParseBuffer(p, bytes_read, bytes_read == 0);
    switch (status)
      @{
        case XML_STATUS_ERROR:
          /* handle error... */
          return 0;
        case XML_STATUS_SUSPENDED:
          return 1;
      @}
      if (bytes_read == 0)
        return 0;
    @}
@}
@end smallexample

The corresponding @cfunc{continue_parsing} function is somewhat simpler,
since it only need deal with the return code from
@cfunc{XML_ResumeParser}; it can delegate the input handling to the
@cfunc{parse_xml} function:

@example
/* Continue parsing a document which had been suspended.
   The 'p' and 'fd' arguments are the same as passed to
   parse_xml().  Return non-zero when the parse is
   suspended. */
int
continue_parsing (XML_Parser p, int fd)
@{
  enum XML_Status status = XML_ResumeParser(p);
  switch (status)
    @{
      case XML_STATUS_ERROR:
        /* handle error... */
        return 0;
      case XML_ERROR_NOT_SUSPENDED:
        /* handle error... */
        return 0;.
      case XML_STATUS_SUSPENDED:
        return 1;
    @}
  return parse_xml(p, fd);
@}
@end example

Now that we've seen what a mess the top--level parsing loop can become,
what have we gained?  Very simply, we can now use the
@cfunc{XML_StopParser} function to stop parsing, without having to go to
great lengths to avoid additional processing that we're expecting to
ignore.  As a bonus, we get to stop parsing temporarily, and come back
to it when we're ready.

To stop parsing from a handler function, use the @cfunc{XML_StopParser}
function.  This function takes two arguments; the parser being stopped
and a flag indicating whether the parse can be resumed in the future.

@c page
@node api
@chapter Expat reference


@menu
* api create::                  Parser creation.
* api parse::                   Parsing.
* api handlers::                Setting the handlers.
* api report::                  Parse position and error
                                reporting functions.
* api version::                 Inspecting Expat version.
* api features::                Inspecting Expat features.
* api memory::                  Parser associated memory.
* api misc::                    Miscellaneous functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node api create
@section Parser creation


@deftypefun XML_Parser XML_ParserCreate (const XML_Char * @var{encoding})
Construct a new parser.  If @var{encoding} is non--@cnull{}, it specifies
a character encoding to use for the document.  This overrides the
document encoding declaration.  There are four built--in encodings:

@example
US-ASCII
UTF-8
UTF-16
ISO-8859-1
@end example

Any other value will invoke a call to the @var{UnknownEncodingHandler}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun XML_Parser XML_ParserCreateNS (const XML_Char * @var{encoding}, XML_Char @var{sep})
Construct a new parser that has namespace processing in effect.
Namespace expanded element names and attribute names are returned as a
concatenation of the namespace @uri{}, @var{sep}, and the local part of
the name.

This means that we should pick a character for @var{sep} that can't be
part of a legal @uri{}.  There is a special case when @var{sep} is the
null character @code{\0}: the namespace @uri{} and the local part will
be concatenated without any separator---this is intended to support
@acronym{RDF} processors.  It is a programming error to use the null
separator with namespace triplets.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun XML_Parser XML_ParserCreate_MM (const XML_Char * @var{encoding}, const XML_Memory_Handling_Suite * @var{ms}, const XML_Char * @var{sep})
Construct a new parser using the suite of memory handling functions
specified in @var{ms}.  If @var{ms} is @cnull{}, then use the standard
set of memory management functions.  If @var{sep} is non--@cnull{}, then
namespace processing is enabled in the created parser and the character
pointed at by @var{sep} is used as the separator between the namespace
@uri{} and the local part of the name.

@example
typedef struct @{
  void * ( *malloc_fcn  )(size_t size);
  void * ( *realloc_fcn )(void *ptr, size_t size);
  void   ( *free_fcn    )(void *ptr);
@} XML_Memory_Handling_Suite;
@end example
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun XML_Parser XML_ExternalEntityParserCreate (XML_Parser @var{p}, const XML_Char * @var{context}, const XML_Char * @var{encoding})
Construct a new @code{XML_Parser} object for parsing an external general
entity.  @var{context} is the context argument passed in a call to a
@var{ExternalEntityRefHandler}.  Other state information such as
handlers, user data, namespace processing is inherited from the parser
passed as the first argument.  So we shouldn't need to call any of the
behavior changing functions on this parser (unless we want it to act
differently than the parent parser).
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_ParserFree (XML_Parser @var{p})
Free memory used by the parser.  Our application is responsible for
freeing any memory associated with user data.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun XML_Bool XML_ParserReset (XML_Parser @var{p}, const XML_Char * @var{encoding})
Clean up the memory structures maintained by the parser so that it may
be used again.  After this has been called, the parser is ready to start
parsing a new document.  All handlers are cleared from the parser,
except for the @var{unknownEncodingHandler}.  The parser's external
state is re--initialized except for the values of @var{ns} and
@var{ns_triplets}.  This function may not be used on a parser created
using @cfunc{XML_ExternalEntityParserCreate}; it will return
@code{XML_FALSE} in that case.  Returns @code{XML_TRUE} on success.
Our application is responsible for dealing with any memory associated
with user data.
@end deftypefun


@c page
@node api parse
@section Parsing


To state the obvious: the three parsing functions @cfunc{XML_Parse},
@cfunc{XML_ParseBuffer} and @cfunc{XML_GetBuffer} must not be called
from within a handler unless they operate on a separate parser instance,
that is, one that did not call the handler.  For example, it is fine to
call the parsing functions from within an
@cfunc{XML_ExternalEntityRefHandler}, if they apply to the parser
created by @cfunc{XML_ExternalEntityParserCreate}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} the @var{len} argument passed to these functions should be
considerably less than the maximum value for an integer, as it could
create an integer overflow situation if the added lengths of a buffer
and the unprocessed portion of the previous buffer exceed the maximum
integer value.  Input data at the end of a buffer will remain
unprocessed if it is part of an @pxml{} token for which the end is not
part of that buffer.
@end quotation


@deftp Enumeration {enum XML_Status}
Type of the return values.

@table @code
@item XML_STATUS_ERROR
Error.

@item XML_STATUS_OK
Success.
@end table
@end deftp


@deftypefun {enum XML_Status} XML_Parse (XML_Parser @var{p}, const char * @var{s}, int @var{len}, int @var{isFinal})
Parse some more of the document.

The string @var{s} is a buffer containing part (or perhaps all) of the
document.  The number of bytes of @var{s} that are part of the document
is indicated by @var{len}.  This means that @var{s} doesn't have to be
zero terminated.

The @var{isFinal} parameter informs the parser that this is the last
piece of the document.  Frequently, the last piece is empty (i.e. @var{len} is
zero).

If successful return @code{XML_STATUS_OK}, otherwise
@code{XML_STATUS_ERROR}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {enum XML_Status} XML_ParseBuffer (XML_Parser @var{p}, int @var{len}, int @var{isFinal})
This is just like @cfunc{XML_Parse}, except in this case Expat provides
the buffer.  By obtaining the buffer from Expat with the
@cfunc{XML_GetBuffer} function, the application can avoid double copying
of the input.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {void *} XML_GetBuffer (XML_Parser @var{p}, int @var{len})
Obtain a buffer of size @var{len} to read a piece of the document into.
Return @cnull{} if Expat can't allocate enough memory for this buffer.

This function has to be called prior to every call to
@cfunc{XML_ParseBuffer}.

A typical use would look like this:

@example
for (;;)
  @{
    int    bytes_read;
    void * buff = XML_GetBuffer(p, BUFF_SIZE);

    if (buff == NULL)
      @{
        /* handle error */
      @}

    bytes_read = read(docfd, buff, BUFF_SIZE);
    if (bytes_read < 0)
      @{
        /* handle error */
      @}

    if (! XML_ParseBuffer(p, bytes_read, bytes_read == 0))
      @{
        /* handle parse error */
      @}

    if (bytes_read == 0)
      break;
  @}
@end example
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {enum XML_Status} XML_StopParser (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_Bool @var{resumable})
Stops parsing, causing @cfunc{XML_Parse} or @cfunc{XML_ParseBuffer} to
return.  Must be called from within a call--back handler, except when
aborting (when @var{resumable} is @code{XML_FALSE}) an already suspended
parser.  Some call--backs may still follow because they would otherwise
get lost, including:

@itemize
@item
the end element handler for empty elements when stopped in the start
element handler;

@item
the end namespace declaration handler when stopped in the end element
handler;

@item
the character data handler when stopped in the character data handler
while making multiple call-backs on a contiguous chunk of characters;
@end itemize

@noindent
and possibly others.

This can be called from most handlers, including @dtd{} related
call--backs, except when parsing an external parameter entity and
@var{resumable} is @code{XML_TRUE}.

If successful return @code{XML_STATUS_OK}, otherwise
@code{XML_STATUS_ERROR}.  The possible error codes are:

@table @code
@item XML_ERROR_SUSPENDED
when suspending an already suspended parser;

@item XML_ERROR_FINISHED
when the parser has already finished;

@item XML_ERROR_SUSPEND_PE
when suspending while parsing an external PE.
@end table

Since the stop/resume feature requires application support in the outer
parsing loop, it is an error to call this function for a parser not
being handled appropriately.  @ref{using stop} for details.

When @var{resumable} is @code{XML_TRUE} then parsing is suspended, that
is, @cfunc{XML_Parse} and @cfunc{XML_ParseBuffer} return
@code{XML_STATUS_SUSPENDED}.  Otherwise, parsing is aborted, that is,
@cfunc{XML_Parse} and @cfunc{XML_ParseBuffer} return
@code{XML_STATUS_ERROR} with error code @code{XML_ERROR_ABORTED}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} This will be applied to the current parser instance only,
that is, if there is a parent parser then it will continue parsing when
the external entity reference handler returns.  It is up to the
implementation of that handler to call @cfunc{XML_StopParser} on the
parent parser (recursively), if one wants to stop parsing altogether.
@end quotation

When suspended, parsing can be resumed by calling
@cfunc{XML_ResumeParser}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} New in Expat 1.95.8.
@end quotation
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {enum XML_Status} XML_ResumeParser (XML_Parser @var{p})
Resume parsing after it has been suspended with @cfunc{XML_StopParser}.
Must not be called from within a handler call--back.

Return the same status codes of @cfunc{XML_Parse} or
@cfunc{XML_ParseBuffer}.

An additional error code, @code{XML_ERROR_NOT_SUSPENDED}, will be
returned if the parser was not currently suspended.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} This must be called on the most deeply nested child parser
instance first, and on its parent parser only after the child parser has
finished, to be applied recursively until the document entity's parser
is restarted.  That is, the parent parser will not resume by itself and
it is up to the application to call @cfunc{XML_ResumeParser} on it at
the appropriate moment.
@end quotation

@quotation
@emph{Note:} New in Expat 1.95.8.
@end quotation
@end deftypefun


@deftp Enumeration {enum XML_Parsing}
Parser status values.  Defined symbols are:

@example
XML_INITIALIZED
XML_PARSING
XML_FINISHED
XML_SUSPENDED
@end example
@end deftp


@deftp {Struct Typedef} XML_ParsingStatus
The status of a parser.  The description of public fields follows.

@table @code
@item enum XML_Parsing parsing
The current status of the parser.

@item XML_Bool finalBuffer
True if the internal buffer holds the final chunk of the document.
@end table
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_GetParsingStatus (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_ParsingStatus * @var{status})
Fill the structure reference by @var{status} with the status of the
parser with respect to being initialized, parsing, finished, or
suspended, and whether the final buffer is being processed.

@var{status} must not be @cnull{}.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} New in Expat 1.95.8.
@end quotation
@end deftypefun


@c page
@node api handlers
@section Setting the handlers


Although handlers are typically set prior to parsing and left alone, an
application may choose to set or change the handler for a parsing event
while the parse is in progress.  For instance, our application may
choose to ignore all text not descended from a @code{para} element.  One
way it could do this is to set the character handler when a @code{para}
start tag is seen, and unset it for the corresponding end tag.

A handler may be unset by providing a @cnull{} pointer to the appropriate
handler setter.  None of the handler setting functions have a return
value.

Our handlers will be receiving strings in arrays of type
@code{XML_Char}.  This type is conditionally defined in @file{expat.h}
as either @code{char}, @code{wchar_t} or @code{unsigned short}.  The
former implies @utf{}-8 encoding, the latter two imply @utf{}-16
encoding.  Note that we'll receive them in this form independent of the
original encoding of the document.


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_StartElementHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_StartElementHandler) (void * user_data,
                                          const XML_Char * name,
                                          const XML_Char ** atts);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetStartElementHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_StartElementHandler @var{start})
Set the handler for start (and empty) tags.  Attributes are passed to
the the start handler as a pointer to a vector of char pointers.  Each
attribute seen in a start (or empty) tag occupies 2 consecutive places
in this vector: the attribute name followed by the attribute value.
These pairs are terminated by a @cnull{} pointer.

Note that an empty tag generates a call to both start and end handlers
(in that order).
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_EndElementHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_EndElementHandler) (void * user_data,
                                        const XML_Char * name);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetEndElementHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_EndElementHandler @var{end})
Set the handler for end (and empty) tags.  As noted above, an empty tag
generates a call to both start and end handlers.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_SetElementHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_StartElementHandler @var{start}, XML_EndElementHandler @var{end})
Set handlers for start and end tags with one call.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_CharacterDataHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_CharacterDataHandler) (void * user_data,
                                           const XML_Char * s,
                                           int len);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetCharacterDataHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_CharacterDataHandler @var{handler})
Set a text handler.  The string the handler receives is @strong{not}
zero--terminated.  We have to use the @var{len} argument to deal with
the end of the string.

A single block of contiguous text free of markup may still result in a
sequence of calls to this handler.  In other words, if we are searching
for a pattern in the text, it may be split across calls to this
handler.

Note: Setting this handler to @cnull{} may @strong{not} immediately
terminate callbacks if the parser is currently processing such a single
block of contiguous markup--free text, as the parser will continue
calling back until the end of the block is reached.
@end deftypefun



@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_ProcessingInstructionHandler
@example
typedef void
  (* XML_ProcessingInstructionHandler) (void * user_data,
                                        const XML_Char * target,
                                        const XML_Char * data);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetProcessingInstructionHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_ProcessingInstructionHandler @var{proc})
Set a handler for processing instructions.  The target is the first word
in the processing instruction.  The data is the rest of the characters
in it after skipping all whitespace after the initial word.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_CommentHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_CommentHandler) (void * user_data,
                                     const XML_Char * data);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetCommentHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_CommentHandler @var{handler})
Set a handler for comments.  The data is all text inside the comment
delimiters.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_StartCdataSectionHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_StartCdataSectionHandler) (void * user_data);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetStartCdataSectionHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_StartCdataSectionHandler @var{start})
Set a handler that gets called at the beginning of a @code{CDATA}
section.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_EndCdataSectionHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_EndCdataSectionHandler) (void * user_data);
@end example
@end deftp

@deftypefun void XML_SetEndCdataSectionHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_EndCdataSectionHandler @var{end})
Set a handler that gets called at the end of a @code{CDATA} section.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_SetCdataSectionHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_StartCdataSectionHandler @var{start}, XML_EndCdataSectionHandler @var{end})
Sets both @code{CDATA} and section handlers with one call.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_DefaultHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_DefaultHandler) (void * user_data,
                                     const XML_Char * s,
                                     int len);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetDefaultHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_DefaultHandler @var{h})
Set a handler for any characters in the document which wouldn't
otherwise be handled.  This includes both data for which no handlers can
be set (like some kinds of @dtd{} declarations) and data which could be
reported but which currently has no handler set.

The characters are passed exactly as they were present in the @pxml{}
document except that they will be encoded in @utf{}-8 or @utf{}-16.
Line boundaries are not normalized.

Note that a byte order mark character is not passed to the default
handler.

There are no guarantees about how characters are divided between calls
to the default handler: for example, a comment might be split between
multiple calls.

Setting the handler with this call has the side effect of turning off
expansion of references to internally defined general entities.  Instead
these references are passed to the default handler.

See also @cfunc{XML_DefaultCurrent}.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_DefaultHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_DefaultHandler) (void * user_data,
                                     const XML_Char *s,
                                     int len);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetDefaultHandlerExpand (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_DefaultHandler @var{h})
Set a default handler, but doesn't inhibit the expansion of internal
entity references.  The entity reference will not be passed to the
default handler.

See also @cfunc{XML_DefaultCurrent}.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_ExternalEntityRefHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef int
  (* XML_ExternalEntityRefHandler) (XML_Parser p,
                                    const XML_Char * context,
                                    const XML_Char * base,
                                    const XML_Char * system_id,
                                    const XML_Char * public_id);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetExternalEntityRefHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_ExternalEntityRefHandler @var{h})
Set an external entity reference handler.  This handler is also called
for processing an external @dtd{} subset if parameter entity parsing is
in effect. (See @cfunc{XML_SetParamEntityParsing}.)

The context parameter specifies the parsing context in the format
expected by the context argument to
@cfunc{XML_ExternalEntityParserCreate}.  @code{code} is valid only until
the handler returns, so if the referenced entity is to be parsed later,
it must be copied.

@var{context} is @cnull{} only when the entity is a parameter entity,
which is how one can differentiate between general and parameter
entities.

The @var{base} parameter is the base to use for relative system
identifiers.  It is set by @cfunc{XML_SetBase} and may be @cnull{}.

The @var{public_id} parameter is the public id given in the entity
declaration and may be @cnull{}.

@var{system_id} is the system identifier specified in the entity
declaration and is never @cnull{}.

There are a couple of ways in which this handler differs from others.

@enumerate
@item
This handler returns a status indicator (an integer).
@code{XML_STATUS_OK} should be returned for successful handling of the
external entity reference.  Returning @code{XML_STATUS_ERROR} indicates
failure, and causes the calling parser to return an
@code{XML_ERROR_EXTERNAL_ENTITY_HANDLING} error.

@item
Instead of having the user data as its first argument, it receives the
parser that encountered the entity reference.  This, along with the
@var{context} parameter, may be used as arguments to a call to
@cfunc{XML_ExternalEntityParserCreate}.  Using the returned parser, the
body of the external entity can be recursively parsed.
@end enumerate

Since this handler may be called recursively, it should not be saving
information into global or static variables.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_SetExternalEntityRefHandlerArg (XML_Parser @var{p}, void * @var{arg})
Set the argument passed to the @code{XML_ExternalEntityRefHandler}.  If
@var{arg} is not @cnull{}, it is the new value passed to the handler set
using @cfunc{XML_SetExternalEntityRefHandler}; if @var{arg} is @cnull{},
the argument passed to the handler function will be the parser object
itself.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} The type of @var{arg} and the type of the first argument to
the @code{XML_ExternalEntityRefHandler} do not match.  This function
takes a @code{void *} to be passed to the handler, while the handler
accepts an @code{XML_Parser}.

This is a historical accident, but will not be corrected before Expat
2.0 (at the earliest) to avoid causing compiler warnings for code that's
known to work with this @api{}.  It is the responsibility of the
application code to know the actual type of the argument passed to the
handler and to manage it properly.
@end quotation
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_SkippedEntityHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void
  (* XML_SkippedEntityHandler) (void * user_data,
                                const XML_Char *entityName,
                                int is_parameter_entity);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetSkippedEntityHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_SkippedEntityHandler @var{h})
Set a skipped entity handler.  This is called in two situations:

@enumerate
@item
An entity reference is encountered for which no declaration has been
read and this is not an error.

@item
An internal entity reference is read, but not expanded, because
@cfunc{XML_SetDefaultHandler} has been called.
@end enumerate

The @var{is_parameter_entity} argument will be non--zero for a parameter
entity and zero for a general entity.

@quotation
@emph{Note:} skipped parameter entities in declarations and skipped
general entities in attribute values cannot be reported, because the
event would be out of sync with the reporting of the declarations or
attribute values.
@end quotation
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_UnknownEncodingHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef int
  (* XML_UnknownEncodingHandler) (void * encodingHandlerData,
                                  const XML_Char *name,
                                  XML_Encoding *info);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftp {Struct Typedef} XML_Encoding
Structure representing an encoding.

@table @code
@item int map[256]
@item void * data
@item int (* convert) (void * data, const char * s)
@item void (* release) (void * data)
@end table
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetUnknownEncodingHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_UnknownEncodingHandler @var{enchandler}, void * @var{encoding_handler_data})
Set a handler to deal with encodings other than the built in set.  This
should be done before @cfunc{XML_Parse} or @cfunc{XML_ParseBuffer} have
been called on the given parser.

If the handler knows how to deal with an encoding with the given name,
it should fill in the @var{info} data structure and return
@code{XML_STATUS_OK}.  Otherwise it should return
@code{XML_STATUS_ERROR}.  The handler will be called at most once per
parsed (external) entity.  The optional application data pointer
@var{encoding_handler_data} will be passed back to the handler.

The @var{map} array contains information for every possible possible
leading byte in a byte sequence.

@itemize
@item
If the corresponding value is >= 0, then it's a single byte sequence and
the byte encodes that Unicode value.

@item
If the value is -1, then that byte is invalid as the initial byte in a
sequence.

@item
If the value is -n, where n is an integer > 1, then n is the number of
bytes in the sequence and the actual conversion is accomplished by a
call to the function pointed at by convert.
@end itemize

This function may return @code{-1} if the sequence itself is invalid.
The @code{convert} pointer may be null if there are only single byte
codes.  The @var{data} parameter passed to the @code{convert} function
is the data pointer from @cfunc{XML_Encoding}.  The string @var{s} is
@strong{not} zero--terminated and points at the sequence of bytes to be
converted.

The function pointed at by @code{release} is called by the parser when
it is finished with the encoding.  It may be @cnull{}.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_StartNamespaceDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void
  (* XML_StartNamespaceDeclHandler) (void * user_data,
                                     const XML_Char *prefix,
                                     const XML_Char *uri);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetStartNamespaceDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_StartNamespaceDeclHandler @var{start})
Set a handler to be called when a namespace is declared.  Namespace
declarations occur inside start tags.  But the namespace declaration
start handler is called before the start tag handler for each namespace
declared in that start tag.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_EndNamespaceDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void
  (* XML_EndNamespaceDeclHandler) (void * user_data,
                                   const XML_Char *prefix);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetEndNamespaceDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_EndNamespaceDeclHandler @var{end})
Set a handler to be called when leaving the scope of a namespace
declaration.  This will be called, for each namespace declaration, after
the handler for the end tag of the element in which the namespace was
declared.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_SetNamespaceDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_StartNamespaceDeclHandler @var{start}, XML_EndNamespaceDeclHandler @var{end})
Set both namespace declaration handlers with a single call.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_XmlDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_XmlDeclHandler) (void            *userData,
                                     const XML_Char  *version,
                                     const XML_Char  *encoding,
                                     int             standalone);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetXmlDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_XmlDeclHandler @var{xmldecl})
Sets a handler that is called for @pxml{} declarations and also for text
declarations discovered in external entities.  The way to distinguish is
that the version parameter will be @cnull{} for text declarations.  The
encoding parameter may be @cnull{} for an @pxml{} declaration.  The
standalone argument will contain -1, 0, or 1 indicating respectively
that there was no standalone parameter in the declaration, that it was
given as no, or that it was given as yes.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_StartDoctypeDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void
  (* XML_StartDoctypeDeclHandler) (void * userData,
                                   const XML_Char * doctypeName,
                                   const XML_Char * sysid,
                                   const XML_Char * pubid,
                                   int has_internal_subset);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetStartDoctypeDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_StartDoctypeDeclHandler @var{start})
Set a handler that is called at the start of a @code{DOCTYPE}
declaration, before any external or internal subset is parsed.  Both
sysid and pubid may be @cnull{}.  The @var{has_internal_subset} will be
non--zero if the @code{DOCTYPE} declaration has an internal subset.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_EndDoctypeDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_EndDoctypeDeclHandler) (void * user_data);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetEndDoctypeDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_EndDoctypeDeclHandler @var{end})
Set a handler that is called at the end of a DOCTYPE declaration, after
parsing any external subset.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_SetDoctypeDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_StartDoctypeDeclHandler @var{start}, XML_EndDoctypeDeclHandler @var{end})
Set both doctype handlers with one call.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_ElementDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void (* XML_ElementDeclHandler) (void *userData,
                                         const XML_Char *name,
                                         XML_Content *model);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftp Enumeration XML_Content_Type
Used to identify the content type.
@end deftp


@defmac XML_CTYPE_EMPTY
@defmacx XML_CTYPE_ANY
@defmacx XML_CTYPE_MIXED
@defmacx XML_CTYPE_NAME
@defmacx XML_CTYPE_CHOICE
@defmacx XML_CTYPE_SEQ
Values of the @code{XML_Content_Type} enumeration.
@end defmac


@deftp Enumeration XML_Content_Quant
Used to identifiy ???
@end deftp


@defmac XML_CQUANT_NONE
@defmacx XML_CQUANT_OPT
@defmacx XML_CQUANT_REP
@defmacx XML_CQUANT_PLUS
Values of the @code{XML_Content_Quant} enumeration.
@end defmac


@deftp Struct XML_cp
@deftpx {Struct Typedef} XML_Content
Description of public fields follows.

@table @code
@item enum XML_Content_Type type
@item enum XML_Content_Quant quant
@item const XML_Char * name
@item unsigned int numchildren
@item XML_Content * children
@end table
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetElementDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_ElementDeclHandler @var{eldecl})
Set a handler for element declarations in a @dtd{}.  The handler gets
called with the name of the element in the declaration and a pointer to
a structure that contains the element model.

It is the application's responsibility to free this data structure using
@cfunc{XML_FreeContentModel}.

The @var{model} argument is the root of a tree of @code{XML_Content}
nodes.

If @code{type} equals @code{XML_CTYPE_EMPTY} or @code{XML_CTYPE_ANY},
then @code{quant} will be @code{XML_CQUANT_NONE}, and the other fields
will be zero or @cnull{}.

If @code{type} is @code{XML_CTYPE_MIXED}, then @code{quant} will be
@code{XML_CQUANT_NONE} or @code{XML_CQUANT_REP} and @code{numchildren}
will contain the number of elements that are allowed to be mixed in and
children points to an array of @code{XML_Content} structures that will
all have type @code{XML_CTYPE_NAME} with no quantification.  Only the
root node can be type @code{XML_CTYPE_EMPTY}, @code{XML_CTYPE_ANY}, or
@code{XML_CTYPE_MIXED}.

For type @code{XML_CTYPE_NAME}, the name field points to the name and
the @code{numchildren} and @code{children} fields will be zero and
@cnull{}.  The @code{quant} field will indicate any quantifiers placed on
the name.

Types @code{XML_CTYPE_CHOICE} and @code{XML_CTYPE_SEQ} indicate a choice
or sequence respectively.  The @code{numchildren} field indicates how
many nodes in the choice or sequence and children points to the nodes.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_AttlistDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void
(* XML_AttlistDeclHandler) (void           * user_data,
                            const XML_Char * elname,
                            const XML_Char * attname,
                            const XML_Char * att_type,
                            const XML_Char * dflt,
                            int            isrequired);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetAttlistDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_AttlistDeclHandler @var{attdecl})
Set a handler for @code{attlist} declarations in the @dtd{}.  This
handler is called for each attribute.  So a single @code{attlist}
declaration with multiple attributes declared will generate multiple
calls to this handler.

The @var{elname} parameter returns the name of the element for which the
attribute is being declared.

The attribute @code{name} is in the @var{attname} parameter.

The attribute @code{type} is in the @var{att_type} parameter. It is the
string representing the type in the declaration with whitespace removed.

The @var{dflt} parameter holds the default value.  It will be @cnull{} in
the case of @code{#IMPLIED} or @code{#REQUIRED} attributes.  We can
distinguish these two cases by checking the @var{isrequired} parameter,
which will be true in the case of @code{#REQUIRED} attributes.

Attributes which are @code{#FIXED} will have also have a true
@var{isrequired}, but they will have the non--@cnull{} fixed value in the
@var{dflt} parameter.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_EntityDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void
(* XML_EntityDeclHandler) (void           * user_data,
                           const XML_Char * entity_name,
                           int              is_parameter_entity,
                           const XML_Char * value,
                           int              value_length,
                           const XML_Char * base,
                           const XML_Char * system_id,
                           const XML_Char * public_id,
                           const XML_Char * notation_name);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetEntityDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_EntityDeclHandler @var{h})
Set a handler that will be called for all entity declarations.  The
@var{is_parameter_entity} argument will be non--zero in the case of
parameter entities and zero otherwise.

For internal entities (@code{<!ENTITY foo "bar">}), @var{value} will be
non--@cnull{} and @var{system_id}, @var{public_id}, and
@var{notation_name} will all be @cnull{}.

The @var{value} string is not zero--terminated; the length is provided
in the @var{value_length} parameter.  Do not use @var{value_length} to
test for internal entities, since it is legal to have zero--length
values.  Instead check for whether or not @var{value} is @cnull{}.

The @var{notation_name} argument will have a non--@cnull{} value only for
unparsed entity declarations.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_UnparsedEntityDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void
  (* XML_UnparsedEntityDeclHandler)
    (void * user_data,
     const XML_Char * entity_name,
     const XML_Char * base,
     const XML_Char * system_id,
     const XML_Char * public_id,
     const XML_Char * notation_name);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetUnparsedEntityDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_UnparsedEntityDeclHandler @var{h})
Set a handler that receives declarations of unparsed entities.  These are
entity declarations that have a notation (@code{NDATA}) field:

@example
<!ENTITY logo SYSTEM "images/logo.gif" NDATA gif>
@end example

This handler is obsolete and is provided for backwards compatibility.
Use instead @cfunc{XML_SetEntityDeclHandler}.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_NotationDeclHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef void
(* XML_NotationDeclHandler) (void * user_data,
                             const XML_Char * notation_name,
                             const XML_Char * base,
                             const XML_Char * system_id,
                             const XML_Char * public_id);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetNotationDeclHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_NotationDeclHandler @var{h})
Set a handler that receives notation declarations.
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Function Pointer Typedef} XML_NotStandaloneHandler
Defined as:

@example
typedef int (* XML_NotStandaloneHandler) (void * user_data);
@end example
@end deftp


@deftypefun void XML_SetNotStandaloneHandler (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_NotStandaloneHandler @var{h})
Set a handler that is called if the document is not ``standalone''.
This happens when there is an external subset or a reference to a
parameter entity, but does not have standalone set to @code{yes} in an
@pxml{} declaration.  If this handler returns @code{XML_STATUS_ERROR},
then the parser will throw an @code{XML_ERROR_NOT_STANDALONE} error.
@end deftypefun



@c page
@node api report
@section Parse position and error reporting functions


These are the functions we'll want to call when the parse functions
return @code{XML_STATUS_ERROR} (a parse error has occurred), although
the position reporting functions are useful outside of errors.  The
position reported is the byte position (in the original document or
entity encoding) of the first of the sequence of characters that
generated the current event (or the error that caused the parse
functions to return @code{XML_STATUS_ERROR}).  The exceptions are
callbacks trigged by declarations in the document prologue, in which
case they exact position reported is somewhere in the relevant markup,
but not necessarily as meaningful as for other events.

The position reporting functions are accurate only outside of the
@dtd{}.  In other words, they usually return bogus information when
called from within a @dtd{} declaration handler.


@deftypefun {enum XML_Error} XML_GetErrorCode (XML_Parser @var{p})
Return what type of error has occurred.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {const XML_LChar *} XML_ErrorString (enum XML_Error @var{code})
Return a string describing the error corresponding to code.  The code
should be one of the enums that can be returned from
@cfunc{XML_GetErrorCode}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun XML_Index XML_GetCurrentByteIndex (XML_Parser @var{p})
Return the byte offset of the position.  This always corresponds to the
values returned by @cfunc{XML_GetCurrentLineNumber} and
@cfunc{XML_GetCurrentColumnNumber}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun XML_Size XML_GetCurrentLineNumber (XML_Parser @var{p})
Return the line number of the position.  The first line is reported as
1.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun XML_Size XML_GetCurrentColumnNumber (XML_Parser @var{p})
Return the offset, from the beginning of the current line, of the
position.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun int XML_GetCurrentByteCount (XML_Parser @var{p})
Return the number of bytes in the current event, 0 if the event is
inside a reference to an internal entity and for the end--tag event for
empty element tags (the later can be used to distinguish empty--element
tags from empty elements using separate start and end tags).
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {const char *} XML_GetInputContext (XML_Parser @var{p}, int * @var{offset}, int * @var{size})
Return the parser's input buffer, sets the integer pointed at by offset
to the offset within this buffer of the current parse position, and set
the integer pointed at by size to the size of the returned buffer.

This should only be called from within a handler during an active parse
and the returned buffer should only be referred to from within the
handler that made the call.  This input buffer contains the untranslated
bytes of the input.

Only a limited amount of context is kept, so if the event triggering a
call spans over a very large amount of input, the actual parse position
may be before the beginning of the buffer.

If @code{XML_CONTEXT_BYTES} is not defined, this will always return
@cnull{}.
@end deftypefun



@c page
@node api version
@section Expat version


@deftypefun {XML_LChar *} XML_ExpatVersion (void)
Return the library version as a string (e.g. @code{expat_1.95.1}).
@end deftypefun


@deftp {Struct Typedef} XML_Expat_Version
Type of structure representing the Expat version.  Description of public
fields follows.

@table @code
@item int major
The major version number.

@item int minor
The minor version number.

@item int micro
The micro version number.
@end table
@end deftp


@deftypefun {struct XML_Expat_Version} XML_ExpatVersionInfo (void)
Return the library version information as a structure (yes, the whole
structure is the returned value).
@end deftypefun


@defmac XML_MAJOR_VERSION
@defmacx XML_MINOR_VERSION
@defmacx XML_MICRO_VERSION
These macros are defined to support compile--time tests of the library
version.  Testing these constants is currently the best way to determine
if particular parts of the Expat @api{} are available.
@end defmac


@c page
@node api features
@section Expat features


@deftp Enumeration XML_FeatureEnum
Type of values representing Expat features.
@end deftp


@defmac XML_FEATURE_END
@defmacx XML_FEATURE_UNICODE
@defmacx XML_FEATURE_UNICODE_WCHAR_T
@defmacx XML_FEATURE_DTD
@defmacx XML_FEATURE_CONTEXT_BYTES
@defmacx XML_FEATURE_MIN_SIZE
@defmacx XML_FEATURE_SIZEOF_XML_CHAR
@defmacx XML_FEATURE_SIZEOF_XML_LCHAR
@defmacx XML_FEATURE_NS
@defmacx XML_FEATURE_LARGE_SIZ
Values of the @code{XML_FeatureEnum} enumeration representing Expat
features.
@end defmac


@deftp {Struct Typedef} XML_Feature
Type of the records representing Expat features.  Public fields
description follows.

@table @code
@item enum XML_FeatureEnum feature
A constant representing the feature.

@item XML_LChar * name
Pointer to a statically allocated string representing the name of the
feature.

@item long int value
A value associated to the feature.
@end table
@end deftp


@deftypefun {const XML_Feature *} XML_GetFeatureList (void)
Return a list of ``feature'' records, providing details on how Expat was
configured at compile time.  Most applications should not need to worry
about this, but this information is otherwise not available from Expat.
This function allows code that needs to check these features to do so at
runtime.

The return value is a pointer to a statically allocated array of
@code{XML_Feature}, terminated by a record with the @code{feature} field
set to @code{XML_FEATURE_END} and @code{name} field set to @cnull{}.

Since an application that requires this kind of information needs to
determine the type of character the name points to, records for the
@code{XML_FEATURE_SIZEOF_XML_CHAR} and
@code{XML_FEATURE_SIZEOF_XML_LCHAR} will be located at the beginning of
the list, followed by @code{XML_FEATURE_UNICODE} and
@code{XML_FEATURE_UNICODE_WCHAR_T}, if they are present at all.

Some features have an associated value.  If there isn't an associated
value, the value field is set to 0.  At this time, the following
features have been defined to have values:

@table @code
@item XML_FEATURE_SIZEOF_XML_CHAR
The number of bytes occupied by one @code{XML_Char} character.

@item XML_FEATURE_SIZEOF_XML_LCHAR
The number of bytes occupied by one @code{XML_LChar} character.

@item XML_FEATURE_CONTEXT_BYTES
The maximum number of characters of context which can be reported by
@cfunc{XML_GetInputContext}.
@end table
@end deftypefun


@c page
@node api memory
@section Parser associated memory


The following functions allow external code to share the memory
allocator an @cfunc{XML_Parser} has been configured to use.  This is
especially useful for third--party libraries that interact with a parser
object created by application code, or heavily layered applications.
This can be essential when using dynamically loaded libraries which use
different C standard libraries (this can happen on Windows, at least).


@deftypefun {void *} XML_MemMalloc (XML_Parser @var{p}, size_t @var{size})
Allocate @var{size} bytes of memory using the allocator the parser
object has been configured to use.  Return a pointer to the memory or
@cnull{} on failure.  Memory allocated in this way must be freed using
@cfunc{XML_MemFree}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {void *} XML_MemRealloc (XML_Parser @var{p}, void * @var{ptr}, size_t @var{size})
Allocate or reallocate @var{size} bytes of memory using the allocator
the parser object has been configured to use.

@var{ptr} must point to a block of memory allocated by
@cfunc{XML_MemMalloc} or @cfunc{XML_MemRealloc}, or be @cnull{}.

When reallocating, this function tries to expand the block pointed to by
@var{ptr} if possible.

Return a pointer to the memory or @cnull{} on failure.  On success, the
original block has either been expanded or freed.  On failure, the
original block has not been freed; the caller is responsible for freeing
the original block.

Memory allocated in this way must be freed using @cfunc{XML_MemFree}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_MemFree (XML_Parser @var{p}, void * @var{ptr})
Free a block of memory pointed to by @var{ptr}.  The block must have
been allocated by @cfunc{XML_MemMalloc} or @cfunc{XML_MemRealloc}, or be
@cnull{}.
@end deftypefun


@c page
@node api misc
@section Miscellaneous functions


The functions in this section either obtain state information from the
parser or can be used to dynamicly set parser options.


@deftypefun void XML_SetUserData (XML_Parser @var{p}, void * @var{user_data})
@deftypefunx {void *} XML_GetUserData (XML_Parser @var{p})
Set or get the user data pointer that gets passed to handlers,
overwriting any previous value.  The application is responsible for
managing the memory associated with @var{user_data}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_UseParserAsHandlerArg (XML_Parser @var{p})
Set the parser pointer itself as @var{user_data} argument for the
handlers.  The user data can still be obtained using the
@cfunc{XML_GetUserData} function.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {enum XML_Status} XML_SetBase (XML_Parser @var{p}, const XML_Char * @var{base})
Set the base to be used for resolving relative @uri{}s in system
identifiers.  The string referenced by @var{base} is duplicated.  If
@var{base} is @cnull{} the base is reset.

Return @code{XML_STATUS_OK} if successful.  Return
@code{XML_STATUS_ERROR} if there's no memory to duplicate the base.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {const XML_Char *} XML_GetBase (XML_Parser @var{p})
Return the current base for resolving relative @uri{}s.  The returned
value can be @cnull{} if no base was set.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun int XML_GetSpecifiedAttributeCount (XML_Parser @var{p})
When attributes are reported to the start handler in the atts vector,
attributes that were explicitly set in the element occur before any
attributes that receive their value from default information in an
@code{ATTLIST} declaration.

This function returns the number of attributes that were explicitly set
times 2, thus giving the offset in the atts array passed to the start
tag handler of the first attribute set due to defaults.  It supplies
information for the last call to a start handler.  If called inside a
start handler, then that means the current call.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun int XML_GetIdAttributeIndex (XML_Parser @var{p})
Return the index of the @code{ID} attribute passed in the atts array in
the last call to @cfunc{XML_StartElementHandler}, or @code{-1} if there
is no @code{ID} attribute.  If called inside a start handler, then that
means the current call.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {enum XML_Status} XML_SetEncoding (XML_Parser @var{p}, const XML_Char * @var{encoding})
Set the encoding to be used by the parser, return @code{XML_STATUS_OK}
if successful.

The string referenced by @var{encoding} is duplicated, the return value
is @code{XML_STATUS_ERROR} if there is not enough memory to duplicate
it.

This function must not be called after @cfunc{XML_Parse} or
@cfunc{XML_ParseBuffer} have been called on the given parser, the return
value is @code{XML_STATUS_ERROR} if the parser is in the
@code{XML_PARSING} or @code{XML_SUSPENDED} status.

Calling this function is equivalent to passing a non--@cnull{} encoding
argument to the parser creation functions.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun int XML_SetParamEntityParsing (XML_Parser @var{p}, enum XML_ParamEntityParsing @var{code})
Enable parsing of parameter entities according to @var{code}, including
the external parameter entity that is the external @dtd{} subset.  The
choices for @var{code} are:

@example
XML_PARAM_ENTITY_PARSING_NEVER
XML_PARAM_ENTITY_PARSING_UNLESS_STANDALONE
XML_PARAM_ENTITY_PARSING_ALWAYS
@end example
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun {enum XML_Error} XML_UseForeignDTD (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_Bool @var{use_dtd})
Allow an application to provide an external subset for the document type
declaration for documents which do not specify an external subset of
their own.

For documents which specify an external subset in their @code{DOCTYPE}
declaration, the application--provided subset will be ignored.

If the document does not contain a @code{DOCTYPE} declaration at all and
@var{use_dtd} is true, the application--provided subset will be parsed,
but the @var{startDoctypeDeclHandler} and @var{endDoctypeDeclHandler}
functions, if set, will not be called.

The setting of parameter entity parsing will be honored (refer to
@cfunc{XML_SetParamEntityParsing}).

The application--provided external subset is read by calling the
external entity reference handler set via
@cfunc{XML_SetExternalEntityRefHandler} with both @var{publicId} and
@var{systemId} set to @cnull{}.

Return values are:

@table @code
@item XML_ERROR_CANT_CHANGE_FEATURE_ONCE_PARSING
If this function is called after parsing has begun; @var{use_dtd} is
ignored.

@item XML_ERROR_FEATURE_REQUIRES_XML_DTD
If called when Expat has been compiled without @dtd{} support, it
returns

@item XML_ERROR_NONE
Otherwise.
@end table

@quotation
@emph{Note:} For the purpose of checking WFC: Entity Declared, passing
@var{use_dtd} == @code{XML_TRUE} will make the parser behave as if the
document had a @dtd{} with an external subset.  This holds true even if
the external entity reference handler returns without action.
@end quotation
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_SetReturnNSTriplet (XML_Parser @var{p}, int @var{do_nst})
This function only has an effect when using a parser created with
@cfunc{XML_ParserCreateNS}, i.e. when namespace processing is in effect.
The @var{do_nst} argument sets whether or not prefixes are returned with
names qualified with a namespace prefix.  If this function is called
with non--zero @var{do_nst}, then namespace qualified names (that is
qualified with a prefix as opposed to belonging to a default namespace)
are returned as a triplet with the three parts separated by the
namespace separator specified when the parser was created.  The order of
returned parts is @uri{}, local name, and prefix.

If @var{do_nst} is zero, then namespaces are reported in the default
manner, @uri{} then local name separated by the namespace separator.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_DefaultCurrent (XML_Parser @var{p})
This function can be called within a handler for a start element, end
element, processing instruction or character data.  It causes the
corresponding markup to be passed to the default handler set by
@cfunc{XML_SetDefaultHandler} or @cfunc{XML_SetDefaultHandlerExpand}.
It does nothing if there is not a default handler.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun void XML_FreeContentModel (XML_Parser @var{p}, XML_Content * @var{model})
Deallocate the model argument passed to the
@cfunc{XML_ElementDeclHandler} callback set using
@cfunc{XML_ElementDeclHandler}.  This function should not be used for
any other purpose.
@end deftypefun


@c page
@node document license
@appendix Document license


Copyright @copyright{} 1998, 1999, 2000 Thai Open Source Software Center
Ltd and Clark Cooper.

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 Expat
maintainers.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node references
@appendix Bibliography and references



@c page
@node concept index
@appendix An entry for each concept

@printindex cp

@node function index
@appendix An entry for each function.

@printindex fn

@node variable index
@appendix An entry for each variable.

@printindex vr

@node type index
@appendix An entry for each type.

@printindex tp

@contents
@bye

@c end of file
